Facts About Nevada 

The Territory of Nevada was created by an Act of Congress, signed by 
President James Buchanan and became effective March 2, 1861. President Abraham 
Lincoln appointed James W. Nye of New York as Nevada's first Territorial 
Governor.

On October 31, 1864, President Lincoln proclaimed Nevada's admission to the 
Union as the 36th state. The creation of the Nevada Territory, and its admission 
to the Union, were related to both the Civil War and the mineral wealth of the 
Comstock Lode. During the next 75 years, many mining towns flourished, if only 
briefly, all over the state. Since 1931, tourism, particularly entertainment and 
legalized gaming, have become increasingly important to Nevada's economy. Mining 
also has rebounded in recent years, and Nevada now produces more gold than any 
other state. Federal legislation enacted in 1986 created the Great Basin 
National Park, the only national park in the state, which includes the area 
around Wheeler Peak and Lehman Caves in eastern Nevada. 

Nevada Nicknames: Sagebrush State, Silver State, Battle-Born State

The origin of the state's name is Spanish, meaning "snow-capped."

Preliminary population estimate as of November, 1998: 1,852,650 Rank: 39th (1990) 

Area: 110,540 square miles, 86 percent federally controlled Rank: 7th largest 

Capital: Carson City, population - 51,860 (November, 1998) 

Most populous city: Las Vegas - 441,230 (November, 1998) 

Most populous county: Clark - 1,255,200 (November, 1998) 

Highest elevation: Boundary Peak in Esmeralda County - 13,140 feet 

Lowest elevation: On the Colorado River in Clark County - 470 feet

State Artifact - 
The Tule Duck was created by early Nevadans almost 2,000 years ago. Discovered 
by archeologists in 1924 during an excavation at Lovelock Cave, the 11 decoys 
are each formed of a bundle of bullrush (tule) stems, bound together and shaped 
to resemble a canvasback duck. 

State Fossil - 
The Ichthyosaur (Shonisaurus) fossil was found in Berlin, east of Gabbs. Nevada 
is the only state to possess a complete skeleton (approximately 55 feet long) of 
this extinct marine reptile. 

State Bird - 
The Mountain Bluebird (Sialia currucoides) lives in the Nevada high country and 
destroys many harmful insects. It is a member of the thrush family and its song 
is a clear, short warble like the caroling of a robin. The male is azure blue 
with a white belly, while the female is brown with a bluish rump, tail, and 
wings. 

State Animal - 
The Desert Bighorn (or Nelson) Sheep (Ovis canadensis nelsoni) is smaller than 
its Rocky Mountain cousin but has a wider spread of horns. The bighorn is 
well-suited for Nevada's mountainous desert country because it can survive for 
long periods without water. The large rams stand about 4 1/2 feet tall and can 
weigh as much as 175 pounds. 

State Fish - 
The Lahontan Cutthroat Trout (Salmo clarki henshawi), a native trout found in 14 
of the state's 17 counties, is adapted to habitats ranging from high mountain 
creeks and alpine lakes to warm, intermittent lowland streams and alkaline lakes 
where no other trout can live. 

State Reptile - 
The Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), the largest reptile in the 
Southwestern United States, lives in the extreme southern parts of Nevada. Its 
hard, dome-shaped shell ranges from tan to black in color. This reptile spends 
much of its life in underground burrows to escape the harsh summer heat and 
winter cold. The desert tortoise can live to be more than 70 years old. 

State Flower - 
Sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata) grows abundantly in the deserts of the Western 
United States. A member of the wormwood family, sagebrush is a branching bush (1 
to 12 feet high) and grows in regions where other kinds of vegetation cannot 
subsist. Known for its pleasant aroma, its gray-green twigs, and pale yellow 
flowers, sagebrush is an important winter food for sheep and cattle. 

State Trees- 
The Single-Leaf Pinon (Pinus monophylla) is an aromatic pine tree with short, 
stiff needles and gnarled branches. The tree grows in coarse, rocky soils and 
rock crevices. Though its normal height is about 15 feet, the single-leaf pinon 
can grow as high as 50 feet under ideal conditions. 

The Bristlecone Pine (Pinus aristata) shares the state tree designation. The 
bristlecone pine is the oldest living thing on Earth, with some specimens in 
Nevada more than 4,000 years of age. The tree can be found at high elevations. 
Normal height for older trees is about 15 to 30 feet, although some have 
attained a height of 60 feet. Diameter growth continues throughout the long life 
of the tree, resulting in massive trunks with a few contorted limbs.

State Grass - 
Indian Ricegrass (Oryzopsis hymenoides), once a staple food source for Nevada 
Indians, now provides valuable feed for wildlife and range livestock. This tough 
native grass, which is found throughout the state, is known for its ability to 
reseed and establish itself on sites damaged by fire or over grazing. 

State Rock - 
Sandstone, in its more traditionally recognized form or as quartzite, is found 
throughout the state. In areas such as the Valley of Fire State Park and Red 
Rock Canyon Recreational Lands, both near Las Vegas, it provides some of 
Nevada's most spectacular scenery. The State Capitol, and the former United 
States Mint, are built of sandstone.

State Precious Gemstone - 
Among the many gemstones found in Nevada, the Virgin Valley Black Fire Opal is 
one of the most beautiful. The Virgin Valley in northern Nevada is the only 
place in North America where the Black Fire Opal is found in any significant 
quantity.

State Semi-precious Gemstone - 
Nevada Turquoise, sometimes called the "Jewel of the Desert," is found in many 
parts of the state. 

State Song - 
In 1933, the Legislature adopted "Home Means Nevada" as the official state song. 
Mrs. Bertha Raffetto of Reno wrote the song to honor the state. The refrain of 
the song goes as follows:
    "Home" means Nevada, "Home" means the hills, "Home" means the sage and the 
    pines. Out by the Truckee's silvery rills. Out where the sun always shines. 
    There is a land that l love the best, Fairer than all I can see. Right in 
    the heart of the golden west "Home" means Nevada to me. 
    (Special thanks to Mrs Alami's and Paragini's 3rd Grade classes at Greenbrae 
    Elementary for recording the state song) 
State Metal - 
Silver (Ag) 

State Colors - 
Silver and Blue


Facts about the Nevada Legislature 

Sessions 
Regular sessions of the Legislature begin the first Monday in February of 
odd-numbered years. Nevada is one of seven states that have true biennial 
sessions. 
Before the 1998 General Election, the length of the legislative sessions in 
Nevada depended upon the time required to review the spending proposals of the 
state agencies and adopt a budget. At the 1998 General Election, Nevada voters 
approved a constitutional amendment limiting future regular biennial sessions to 
120 days. The amendment also requires the governor to submit the executive 
budget to the Legislature two weeks before the start of session. Nevada has more 
than 184 state agencies with about 463 budget units. The 1997 Regular Session 
lasted 169 calendar days, which tied 1995 as the second longest session in 
Nevada history. The 1981, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1995 sessions ran 
137, 126, 135, 151, 167, 161 , and 166 days, respectively. 

The Governor may also call the Legislature into a special session. A l-day 
special session in 1989 was the 16th special session in the past 125 years. 
The Legislature Between Sessions 
The Legislature has an ongoing staff agency known as the Legislative Counsel 
Bureau. This agency encompasses the Fiscal, Legal, and Research Divisions, which 
provide support for the Legislature. It also includes the Audit Division whose 
job consists of auditing the accounts of state agencies, and an Administrative 
Division, which provides accounting, security and various "housekeeping" 
functions. 

The Legislative Counsel Bureau is supervised by the Legislative Commission, a 
body of 12 legislators, six from each house. The commission also takes actions 
on behalf of the legislative branch of government when the full Legislature is 
not in session. This body meets every few months between sessions to provide 
guidance to staff of the Legislative Counsel Bureau and to deal with other 
interim matters. 

The Interim Finance Committee, composed of the members of the Senate Committee 
on Finance and the Assembly Committee on Ways and Means from the preceding 
session, makes fiscal decisions for the Legislature during the period between 
regular sessions. The Interim Finance Committee endeavors to maintain an 
adequate fund balance to meet unforeseen financial emergencies. 

Every member of the Legislature is involved in interim subcommittee work between 
sessions. In addition, several statutory committees meet regularly, including 
the Committees on Health Care, High-Level Radioactive Waste, and Public Lands. 
During each regular session, the Legislature passes several bills and 
resolutions directing the Legislative Commission to study particular subjects 
and report when the Legislature reconvenes. The commission accomplishes its task 
by creating subcommittees drawn from the entire membership of the Legislature 
and assigning staff resources to the subcommittees. The interim subcommittees 
hold hearings, direct research and deliberate on proposed legislation for the 
next session of the Legislature. 

Qualifications of Legislators
To be elected to either house of the Legislature, a person must be at least 21 
years of age at the time of the election, a resident of the state for 1 year and 
a qualified elector in the district to be represented. 
Terms of Office 
All members of the Assembly are elected for 2-year terms at the general election 
held in even-numbered years. Members of the Senate are elected for 4-year terms, 
with half being elected in one general election and the other half in the next. 
Compensation
Legislators receive a salary of $130 per day for the first 60 days of each 
regular session and the first 20 days of each special session. In addition, a 
per diem allowance of $80 per day is authorized by statute. Legislators receive 
additional allowances for stationery, postage, travel, and telephone use. 


Organizing the Legislature 

When the Legislature convenes on the first monday of February of odd-numbered 
years, there are no operative rules and, in the Assembly, no presiding officer. 
The Secretary of State calls the Assembly to order at the beginning of a session 
and appoints a Temporary Chief Clerk. After roll call, the Secretary of State 
appoints a Temporary Committee on Legislative Functions, which examines the 
election certificate of each member of the Assembly and recommends the seating 
of legislators whose certificates are in order. Once the members of the Assembly 
have been sworn in by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Secretary of 
State customarily asks for nominations for Speaker. Since the speakership is 
usually predetermined in caucus, by tradition, the procedure is to nominate only 
one candidate, who is elected unanimously. The Secretary of State then turns the 
chair over to the new Speaker, who proceeds to conduct elections for Speaker pro 
Tempore and Chief Clerk of the Assembly. After the Assembly is organized and 
standing rules are adopted, committees are appointed to inform the Senate and 
Governor that the Assembly is ready for business. 

On the Senate side, the Lieutenant Governor presides over the chamber as 
President, in accordance with the provisions of the Nevada Constitution. The 
procedures followed, with the exception of the election of a presiding officer 
(which is dispensed with in the Senate), parallel those of the Assembly. The 
major difference is that the Senate is not an entirely new body. As near as is 
possible to one-half of the Senators are elected at each general election, the 
remainder serving in a holdover capacity. 

In the past, shortly after both Houses had organized, they met in joint session 
in the Assembly Chambers to hear the "State of the State" address by the 
Governor. In 1999, the Governor delivered his address on January 18th, two weeks 
before the Legislature convened. The Governor addressed the Legislature earlier 
in 1999 because he is now required by the constitution to submit his budget 
proposal to the Legislature two weeks before it convenes. In this message to the 
Legislature, the Governor discusses his proposed budget, outlines the major 
problems confronting the state, and proposes legislative solutions for the 
consideration of the Houses. Under usual circumstances, the speech highlights 
the most important elements of the Governor's party's legislative program. It 
constitutes the "action" agenda of the session, for even if the legislative 
majority party is not of the same political persuasion, the Governor's message 
will delineate the significant sphere of issues to be resolved. 
Long before the Legislature convenes in February, the legislative process is set 
in motion in subtle and frequently intangible ways. Social problems enter the 
forum of public debate and, through the exchange of ideas among the citizenry, 
certain opinions and issues are given the impetus needed to find expression in 
the legislative arena. Contending positions on public questions are identified, 
and proposed solutions to problems and conflicts are advocated in the press, 
among the people, in the academic community, within various interest groups, and 
among concerned governmental agencies and officials. But whatever the source of 
an idea for resolving a civic issue, that idea must be translated into a 
concrete legislative proposal for action, a bill or resolution, before it can 
formally enter the legislative forum for consideration. 


FLOOR LEADERS 

In addition to the formal leadership in the two Houses of the Legislature, the 
partisan nature of the chambers makes it necessary to use party leadership 
positions to manage the legislative workload. In both Houses, Majority and 
Minority Floor Leaders of their respective parties are selected during party 
caucuses, and their election is announced from the floor of the Houses. The 
Senate and Assembly also have, by custom, established the positions of Assistant 
Majority Floor Leader, Assistant Minority Floor Leader, Majority Whip, and 
Minority Whip. Floor leaders are not legal officers of the Houses, since their 
offices do not exist under provisions of law. In Nevada, the Senate Majority 
Leader is the actual leader of the Senate, with powers similar to those of the 
Speaker of the Assembly. 

Usually, the Majority Floor Leader in each House refers to committee those bills 
that are received from the other House and works closely with the presiding 
officer on parliamentary operations involving legislation being considered on 
the floor. Thus, it is obvious that a thorough knowledge of parliamentary 
procedure is an important attribute of a competent Majority Floor Leader. 
Floor leaders are party officials in the Legislature and are responsible for 
maintaining party discipline in their respective Houses. Straight party voting 
is relatively uncommon in the Nevada Legislature, as members customarily 
exercise wide latitude in voting. But in certain critical areas (as in the 
organization of the Assembly), the Majority and Minority Floor Leaders are 
expected to call a caucus to determine their partys' stance on an issue. Once a 
position is agreed upon, the floor leaders act as "whips" to solidify partisan 
support for the caucus decision. The tenure of the floor leaders extends during 
the interim between regular sessions of the Legislature and until the election 
of their successors after the general election. 


LEGISLATIVE OFFICERS: ASSEMBLY 

The presiding officer of the Nevada Assembly is the Speaker. Unlike the 

President of the Senate, the Speaker of the Assembly is elected from among the 
membership of the Assembly. The Assembly Standing Rules provide that the Speaker 
shall, among other things: (1) preserve order and decorum and have general 
direction of the chamber; (2) decide all questions of order, subject to each 
member's right to appeal; (3) have the right to assign the duties of the Chair 
to any member for up to 1 legislative day; (4) have the power to accredit the 
persons who act as representatives of the news media and assign their seats; (5) 
sign all bills and resolutions passed by the Legislature and all subpoenas 
issued by the Assembly or any committee thereof; and (6) vote on final passage 
of a bill or resolution. The Speaker is not required to vote in ordinary 
legislative proceedings except when such a vote would be decisive. In all aye 
and nay votes, the Speaker's name is required to be called last. The Speaker is 
third in the line of succession to the governorship, behind the Lieutenant 
Governor and President pro Tempore of the Senate. The tenures of the President 
pro Tempore and the Speaker continue beyond the end of the session and until 
their successors are designated after the general election. 

It has been customary for the Assembly to elect a Speaker pro Tempore to preside 
in the temporary absence of the Speaker. This officer's duties are comparable to 
those of the President pro Tempore of the Senate, exclusive of the right of 
succession to the governorship. Assembly Standing Rule 1 requires that if a 
permanent vacancy occurs in the office of Speaker, the Assembly shall select a 
new Speaker. The Assembly also elects a Chief Clerk, who functions in the same 
fashion as the Secretary of the Senate. 


STANDING COMMITTEES 

Each House of the Nevada Legislature has its own standing committees, the 
members of which are appointed by the presiding officer in accordance with 
current standing rules. The number of members is determined by these rules, and 
many times there are changes made, especially in the Assembly, at the beginning 
of each session. In the Senate, the composition and leadership of the committees 
is usually determined in party caucuses. In the Assembly, the Speaker, who is 
usually a member of the majority party, makes the committee appointments and 
uses such appointments as part of the campaign to be Speaker. The Speaker also 
designates the Chairman and Vice Chairman of each committee. Usually, minority 
party memberships in Assembly committees are determined in caucuses of the 
minority party, and the Speaker appoints the members as agreed to in such 
caucuses. With some exceptions, the general practice is for the majority party 
to have a bare majority of the members in each committee (or most committees) 
when total membership of a House is closely divided between both political 
parties. When there is a substantial margin of majority party members, however, 
this practice has been modified to allow a predominance of majority party 
members on each standing committee. Basic rules for the functioning of 
committees are contained in the standing rules of the Houses and Mason's Manual 
of Legislative Procedure, which has been adopted by both Houses as the basis of 
parliamentary practice in all cases in which it is applicable and in which it is 
not inconsistent with the standing rules of the Houses.

Committees are the workshops of the Legislature. Visitors to the two chambers 
are often amazed at the rapidity with which business is dispatched, little 
realizing that long hours in committee sessions have transpired prior to any 
floor action on a bill. It is in committee that hearings are held, testimony 
from interested parties is taken, and bills are analyzed line by line for their 
legal and social merits. 

Committees make several types of recommendations on legislative measures that 
come before them for consideration. By use of a standard form containing several 
preprinted recommendations, an Assembly committee may report a bill back to the 
whole House with a: "Do pass"; "Amend, and do pass, as amended"; or a "Do pass, 
as amended" recommendation. Such recommendations mean that a committee considers 
a bill to have sufficient merit to justify its enactment, either as introduced 
or with appropriate amendments. Other recommendations concerning a bill include: 
(1) a report that the bill be passed and re-referred, or amended and 
re-referred, to a specified committee; (2) "Do not pass" (in which case the 
committee is recommending its rejection by the whole House); and (3) "Do pass, 
and place on consent calendar." This procedure is discussed later under the 
heading "Consent Calendar." 

A committee may also report a bill "Without recommendation," or "Amend, but 
without recommendation," which means that the committee was unable to reach a 
conclusion on what it believes should be the action to be taken by the whole 
House. On occasion, a committee will report a bill to the floor with both a 
majority and minority recommendation. 

Three Assembly Rules (46, 47, and 48) require that records be kept of committee 
votes on bills or resolutions and of committee proceedings. Furthermore, these 
records, minutes, and documents are required to be filed in the offices of the 
Legislative Counsel Bureau upon adjournment sine die. 
Standing committees may perform other functions besides considering legislation. 
For example, Senate Rule 54 encourages each standing committee of the Senate to 
plan and conduct a general review of selected programs of state agencies or 
other areas of public interest within the committee's jurisdiction. 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
In addition to standing committees, which continue in existence throughout a 
session, there are two other types of committees used by the Legislature in 
Nevada--Committees of the Whole and select committees. A Committee of the Whole 
is a committee composed of the entire membership of one of the Houses. It is 
usually convened so that the House can consider proposed legislation informally, 
without being bound by the requirements on formal consideration set out in the 
Nevada Constitution, statutes, and legislative rules. Such restrictions include 
limitations on debate and the necessity for maintaining a quorum. It is a 
procedural device for expediting House action. When the Senate forms itself into 
a Committee of the Whole, the Senator who made the motion for the Committee of 
the Whole is required to name a Chairman to preside over the committee. In the 
Assembly, the Speaker names a Chairman to preside. A Committee of the Whole is a 
temporary or "ad hoc" committee. At the conclusion of its deliberations, the 
Committee of the Whole (through its Chairman) normally reports its 
recommendations back to the House for formal action, in the same manner as 
standing or select committees. 


SELECT COMMITTEES AND 
COMMITTEES OF CONFERENCE 

Select committees are temporary committees, appointed for a special purpose, 
which may be the consideration of a particular bill or the performance of a 
ceremonial function (e.g., a Committee of Escort for the Governor). In Nevada, 
bills of application or primary concern to particular localities are sometimes 
referred to select committees composed of the legislative delegation from the 
area affected. 

A particularly important type of select committee is the Committee of 
Conference. Whenever a bill is passed by both Houses in differing forms because 
of amendments added by one of the Houses, and the two Houses cannot agree on 
identical language for the bill in question, each House appoints a number of 
conferees to meet with conferees of the other House to seek a resolution of the 
differences existing in the two versions of the bill. In a Committee of 
Conference, the conferees of one House may agree to amendments adopted in the 
other House or recede from the amendments adopted by their chamber. Conferees 
may also decide that new amendments or even new bills are necessary to reach 
accord. A Committee of Conference may consider the whole subject matter of a 
bill without restriction to the points in dispute and may make any changes it 
deems appropriate. Once the conferees reach an agreement, they report back to 
their respective Houses with their recommendations. The report of a conference 
committee may be adopted by acclamation, and such action is considered 
equivalent to the adoption of any amendments or changes recommended in the 
report, but conference reports themselves are not subject to amendment. 

The Joint Rules of the Senate and Assembly require that there be no more than 
two Committees of Conference on any bill or resolution. The rules also require 
that a majority of the members from each House on a committee be members who 
voted for the passage of the measure. No member who served on the first 
conference committee for a measure may be appointed to the second. If agreement 
cannot be reached by the second conference committee, the bill or resolution is 
dead. 


Facts about the Nevada Legislature (2nd time)

Sessions 
Regular sessions of the Legislature begin the first Monday in February of 
odd-numbered years. Nevada is one of seven states that have true biennial 
sessions. 

Before the 1998 General Election, the length of the legislative sessions in 
Nevada depended upon the time required to review the spending proposals of the 
state agencies and adopt a budget. At the 1998 General Election, Nevada voters 
approved a constitutional amendment limiting future regular biennial sessions to 
120 days. The amendment also requires the governor to submit the executive 
budget to the Legislature two weeks before the start of session. Nevada has more 
than 184 state agencies with about 463 budget units. The 1997 Regular Session 
lasted 169 calendar days, which tied 1995 as the second longest session in 
Nevada history. The 1981, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1995 sessions ran 
137, 126, 135, 151, 167, 161 , and 166 days, respectively. 

The Governor may also call the Legislature into a special session. A l-day 
special session in 1989 was the 16th special session in the past 125 years. 
The Legislature Between Sessions 
The Legislature has an ongoing staff agency known as the Legislative Counsel 
Bureau. This agency encompasses the Fiscal, Legal, and Research Divisions, which 
provide support for the Legislature. It also includes the Audit Division whose 
job consists of auditing the accounts of state agencies, and an Administrative 
Division, which provides accounting, security and various "housekeeping" 
functions. 

The Legislative Counsel Bureau is supervised by the Legislative Commission, a 
body of 12 legislators, six from each house. The commission also takes actions 
on behalf of the legislative branch of government when the full Legislature is 
not in session. This body meets every few months between sessions to provide 
guidance to staff of the Legislative Counsel Bureau and to deal with other 
interim matters. 

The Interim Finance Committee, composed of the members of the Senate Committee 
on Finance and the Assembly Committee on Ways and Means from the preceding 
session, makes fiscal decisions for the Legislature during the period between 
regular sessions. The Interim Finance Committee endeavors to maintain an 
adequate fund balance to meet unforeseen financial emergencies. 

Every member of the Legislature is involved in interim subcommittee work between 
sessions. In addition, several statutory committees meet regularly, including 
the Committees on Health Care, High-Level Radioactive Waste, and Public Lands. 
During each regular session, the Legislature passes several bills and 
resolutions directing the Legislative Commission to study particular subjects 
and report when the Legislature reconvenes. The commission accomplishes its task 
by creating subcommittees drawn from the entire membership of the Legislature 
and assigning staff resources to the subcommittees. The interim subcommittees 
hold hearings, direct research and deliberate on proposed legislation for the 
next session of the Legislature. 

Qualifications of Legislators
To be elected to either house of the Legislature, a person must be at least 21 
years of age at the time of the election, a resident of the state for 1 year and 
a qualified elector in the district to be represented. 

Terms of Office 
All members of the Assembly are elected for 2-year terms at the general election 
held in even-numbered years. Members of the Senate are elected for 4-year terms, 
with half being elected in one general election and the other half in the next. 

Compensation
Legislators receive a salary of $130 per day for the first 60 days of each 
regular session and the first 20 days of each special session. In addition, a 
per diem allowance of $80 per day is authorized by statute. Legislators receive 
additional allowances for stationery, postage, travel, and telephone use. 


Sessions 
Regular sessions of the Nevada Legislature are held biennially, in odd-numbered 
years. Beginning with the 1999 Regular Session, they are limited to 120 calendar 
days. Sessions convene on the 1st Monday in February in odd-numbered years next 
ensuing the election of members of the Assembly, unless the Governor convenes a 
special session at an earlier date by proclamation. Nevada's voters approved the 
120-day limitation through constitutional amendment at the 1998 General 
Election. The amendment also requires the governor to submit the executive 
budget to the Legislature two weeks before the start of session.
The Nevada Constitution limits the number of days for which legislators may 
receive compensation. Since 1987, the salary of members has been set by statute 
at $130 per day. However, the constitution forbids compensation for services to 
be paid to legislators for more than 60 calendar days for any regular session 
and 20 days for any special session. Reimbursement for actual expenses of 
members, however, may continue for the entire length of a session. After the 
repeal in 1958 of a constitutional provision setting a 60-day maximum limitation 
on the duration of a session, there was only one regular session of less than 60 
days, that being the single annual session of 1960, which lasted 55 days. From 
1975 through 1997, regular sessions in Nevada ran between 113 and 169 days. The 
1995 and 1997 Legislative Sessions lasted a record 169 days. Conversely, 
however, the 1989 Special Session was the shortest in history, lasting just over 
2 hours in the Senate. The record for the longest time a session has continued 
into the calendar year is held by the 1997 Session, lasting until July 7. 
Special sessions of the Legislature may only be convened on the call of the 
Governor. After both Houses have organized in special session, the Governor is 
required by the Nevada Constitution to state the purpose for which they have 
been convened. The Legislature may not enact any bills or joint resolutions 
pertaining to subjects other than those for which they were convened. The 
Governor, however, may expand the reasons for calling the Legislature into 
session at any time during that session, thereby reducing the restrictions on 
legislative initiative, and the Legislature, at times, has adopted simple or 
concurrent resolutions to express its sentiments on matters not contained in the 
Governor's call. 

Legislative activities, including committee hearings, are open to the public. 
The constitution also requires that neither House may, without the consent of 
the other, adjourn for more than 3 days, nor move to any place other than where 
it is holding its sessions. 


Procedure and Order of Business in the Senate and Assembly 

The Senate and the Assembly function in accordance with constitutional and 
statutory provisions as well as standing rules. The Senate and Assembly rules 
stipulate that Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure shall govern in all cases 
in which it is not inconsistent with the standing rules and orders and the Joint 
Rules of the two Houses. Under the Standing Rules of the Assembly, precedence of 
parliamentary authority is as follows: 
1. The Nevada Constitution. 
2. The Statutes of Nevada. 
3. The Standing Rules of the Assembly and the Joint Standing Rules of the Senate 
and Assembly. 
4. Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure. 
The same precedence, while not explicitly stated in its Standing Rules, is 
followed in the Senate. 
The Secretary of the Senate and the Chief Clerk of the Assembly serve as 
parliamentarians for their respective Houses. 
Under the rules of the Senate, the President calls the chamber to order at 11 
a.m., each day of sitting, unless the Senate has adjourned to some other hour. 
The Assembly also meets daily at 11 a.m., unless it has previously adjourned to 
some other hour. 
Quorum 
The Nevada Constitution states that a majority of all members elected to each 
House constitutes a quorum to transact business. However, a number smaller than 
this quorum may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of absent 
members. 
Order of Business 
Each House has an official order of business incorporated into its Standing 
Rules. 
In the Senate, the order of business is as follows: 
1. Roll Call. 
2. Prayer by the Chaplain. 
3. Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag. 
4. Reading and Approval of the Journal. 
5. Reports of Standing Committees. 
6. Messages from the Governor. 
7. Messages from the Assembly. 
8. Communications from State Officers. 
9. Motions, Resolutions and Notices. 
10. Introduction, First Reading and Reference. 
11. Consent Calendar. 
12. Second Reading and Amendment. 
13. Business on General File and Third Reading. 
14. Unfinished Business. 
15. Special Orders of the Day. 
16. Remarks from the Floor; Introduction of Guests. 

On the Assembly side, the order of business varies slightly: 
1. Roll Call. 
2. Reading and Approval of Journal. 
3. Presentation of Petitions. 
4. Reports of Standing Committees. 
5. Reports of Select Committees. 
6. Communications. 
7. Messages from the Senate. 
8. Motions, Resolutions, and Notices. 
9. Introduction, First Reading and Reference. 
10. Consent Calendar. 
11. Second Reading and Amendment. 
12. General File and Third Reading. 
13. Unfinished Business of Preceding Day. 
14. Special Orders of the Day. 
15. Remarks from the Floor, limited to 10 minutes. 
Each item in the official order of business is considered as the House 
progresses through the day's program of business. From time to time, however, 
members may request that the presiding officer turn to items of business that 
are out of the usual order. 


ACT OF CONGRESS (1861) ORGANIZING THE TERRITORY OF NEVADA

[See 12 United States Statutes at Large (1863), pp. 209-214. Section leadlines 
have been supplied by the Legislative Counsel of the State of Nevada.]

Chap. LXXXIII.
An Act to organize the Territory of Nevada.
Boundaries of territory; Indian rights; division into two or more territories. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of 
America in Congress assembled, That all that part of the territory of the United 
States, included within the following limits, to wit: beginning at the point of 
intersection of the forty-second degree of north latitude with the thirty-ninth 
degree of longitude west from Washington; thence, running south on the line of 
said thirty-ninth degree of west longitude, until it intersects the northern 
boundary line of the Territory of New Mexico; thence due west to the dividing 
ridge separating the waters of Carson Valley from those that flow into the 
Pacific; thence on said dividing ridge northwardly to the forty-first degree of 
north latitude; thence due north to the southern boundary line of the State of 
Oregon; thence due east to the place of beginning, be, and the same is hereby, 
erected into a temporary government by the name of the Territory of Nevada: 
Provided, That so much of the Territory within the present limits of the State 
of California shall not be included within this Territory until the State of 
California shall assent to the same by an act irrevocable without the consent of 
the United States: Provided, further, That nothing in this act contained shall 
be construed to impair the rights of person or property now pertaining to the 
Indians in said Territory, so long as such rights shall remain unextinguished by 
treaty between the United States and such Indians, or to include any territory 
which, by treaty with any Indian tribe, is not, without the consent of said 
tribe, to be included within the territorial limits or jurisdiction of any State 
or Territory; but all such territory shall be excepted out of the boundaries and 
constitute no part of the Territory of Nevada, until said tribe shall signify 
their assent to the President of the United States to be included within the 
said Territory, or to affect the authority of the Government of the United 
States to make any regulations respecting such Indians, their lands, property, 
or other rights, by treaty, law, or otherwise, which it would have been 
competent for the Government to make if this act had never passed: Provided, 
further, That nothing in this act contained shall be construed to inhibit the 
Government of the United States from dividing said Territory into two or more 
Territories, in such manner and at such times as Congress shall deem convenient 
and proper, or from attaching any portion thereof to any other Territory or 
State. 
Sec. 2. Governor: Term, powers and duties. And be it further enacted, That the 
executive power and authority in and over said Territory of Nevada shall be 
vested in a governor, who shall hold his office for four years, and until his 
successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the 
President 
of the United States. The governor shall reside within said Territory, shall be 
commander-in-chief of the militia thereof, shall perform the duties and receive 
the emoluments of superintendent of Indian Affairs, and shall approve all laws 
passed by the legislative assembly before they shall take effect; he may grant 
pardons for offences against the laws of said Territory, and reprieves for 
offences against the laws of the United States until the decision of the 
President can be made known thereon; he shall commission all officers who shall 
be appointed to office under the laws of said Territory, and shall take care 
that the laws be faithfully executed.
NEVADA CASES.
Governor's role in enactment of laws. On petition for writ of mandamus to 
enforce distribution of taxes for common schools in Ormsby County as required by 
certain acts of territorial legislature, provision of section 4 of act 
organizing territory, which vested legislative power in governor and legislative 
assembly, limited power to approve laws as conferred on governor by section 2, 
and act signed by governor after adjournment of legislative assembly was void. 
Trustees of School Dist. No. 1 v. County Comm'rs, 1 Nev. 334 (1865)
Sec. 3. Territorial secretary: Term, powers and duties. And be it further 
enacted, That there shall be a secretary of said Territory, who shall reside 
therein, and hold his office for four years, unless sooner removed by the 
President of the United States; he shall record and preserve all the laws and 
proceedings of the legislative assembly hereinafter constituted, and all the 
acts and proceedings of the governor, in his executive department; he shall 
transmit one copy of the laws and one copy of the executive proceedings, on or 
before the first day of December in each year, to the President of the United 
States, and at the same time two copies of the laws to the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives and the President of the Senate, for the use of Congress; and 
in case of the death, removal, or resignation, or other necessary absence of the 
governor from the Territory, the secretary shall have, and he is hereby 
authorized and required, to execute and perform all the powers and duties of the 
governor during such vacancy or necessary absence, or until another governor 
shall be duly appointed to fill such vacancy.
Sec. 4. Legislative assembly: Council and house of representatives. And be it 
further enacted, That the legislative power and authority of said Territory 
shall be vested in the governor and a legislative assembly. The legislative 
assembly shall consist of a Council and House of Representatives. The Council 
shall consist of nine members, which may be increased to thirteen, having the 
qualifications of voters as hereinafter prescribed, whose term of service shall 
continue two years. The House of Representatives shall consist of thirteen 
members, which may be increased to twenty-six, possessing the same 
qualifications as prescribed for members of the Council, and whose term of 
service shall continue one year. An apportionment shall be made, as nearly equal 
as practicable, among the several counties or districts for the election of the 
Council and House of Representatives, giving to each section of the Territory 
representation in the ratio of its population (Indians excepted), as nearly as 
may be; and the members of the Council and of the House of Representatives shall 
reside in, and be inhabitants of, the district for which they may be elected, 
respectively. Previous to the first election, the Governor shall cause a census 
or enumeration of the inhabitants of the several counties and districts of the 
Territory to be taken; and the first election shall be held at such time and 
places, and be conducted in such manner, as the Governor shall appoint and 
direct; and he shall, at the same time, declare the number of the members of the 
Council and House of Representatives to which each of the counties or districts 
shall be entitled under this act. The number of persons authorized to be elected 
having the highest number of votes in each of said council districts for members 
of the Council shall be declared by the Governor to be duly elected to the 
Council; and the person or persons authorized to be elected having the greatest 
number of votes for the House of Representatives, equal to the number to which 
each county or district shall be entitled, shall be declared by the Governor to 
be elected members of the House of Representatives: Provided, That in case of a 
tie between two or more persons voted for, the Governor shall order a new 
election to supply the vacancy made by such tie. And the persons thus elected to 
the legislative assembly shall meet at such place and on such day as the 
Governor shall appoint; but thereafter, the time, place, and manner of holding 
and conducting all elections by the people, and the apportioning the 
representations, in the several counties or districts to the Council and House 
of Representatives, according to the population, shall be prescribed by law, as 
well as the day of the commencement of the regular sessions of the legislative 
assembly: Provided, That no one session shall exceed the term of forty days, 
except the first, which may be extended to sixty days, but no longer.
NEVADA CASES.
Governor's role in enactment of laws. On petition for writ of mandamus to 
enforce distribution of taxes for common schools in Ormsby County as required by 
certain acts of territorial legislature, provision of section 4 of act 
organizing territory, which vested legislative power in governor and legislative 
assembly, limited power to approve laws as conferred on governor by section 2, 
and act signed by governor after adjournment of legislative assembly was void. 
Trustees of School Dist. No. 1 v. County Comm'rs, 1 Nev. 334 (1865)
Sec. 5. Qualifications of voters and officers. And be it further enacted, That 
every free white male inhabitant of the United States above the age of 
twenty-one years, who shall have been a resident of said Territory at the time 
of the passage of this act, shall be entitled to vote at the first election, and 
shall be eligible to any office within the said Territory; but the 
qualifications of voters and of holding office at all subsequent elections shall 
be such as shall be prescribed by the Legislative Assembly: Provided, That the 
right of suffrage and of holding office shall be exercised only by citizens of 
the United States and those who shall have declared on oath their intention to 
become such, and shall have taken an oath to support the Constitution of the 
United States.
Sec. 6. Legislative power. And be it further enacted, That the legislative power 
of the Territory shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation consistent 
with the Constitution of the United States and the provisions of this act; but 
no law shall be passed interfering with the primary disposal of the soil; no tax 
shall be imposed upon the property of the United States; nor shall the lands or 
other property of non-residents be taxed higher than the lands or other property 
of residents; nor shall any law be passed impairing the rights of private 
property; nor shall any discrimination be made in taxing different kinds of 
property; but all property subject to taxation shall be in proportion to the 
value of the property taxed.
 
NEVADA CASES.
Taxation of property. Territorial legislature may tax any species of property, 
whether real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, so far as they are 
not restrained by the organic act. Hale & Norcross Gold & Silver Mining Co. v. 
Storey County, 1 Nev. 104 (1865)
Taxation of possessory interest in mining claim. Taxation of possessory interest 
in mining claim was not in violation of section 6 of Act Organizing the 
Territory of Nevada, which prohibited territorial legislature from taxing 
property of United States. Hale & Norcross Gold & Silver Mining Co. v. Storey 
County, 1 Nev. 104 (1865)
Sec. 7. Township, district and county officers: Appointment; election. And be it 
further enacted, That all township, district, and county officers, not herein 
otherwise provided for, shall be appointed or elected, as the case may be, in 
such manner as shall be provided by the governor and legislative assembly of the 
Territory. The governor shall nominate and, by and with the advice and consent 
of the legislative council, appoint all officers not herein otherwise provided 
for; and, in the first instance, the governor alone may appoint all said 
officers, who shall hold their offices until the end of the first session of the 
legislative assembly, and shall lay off the necessary districts for members of 
the council and house of representatives, and all other officers.
Sec. 8. Members of legislative assembly ineligible to certain offices. And be it 
further enacted, That no member of the legislative assembly shall hold or be 
appointed to any office which shall have been created, or the salary or 
emoluments of which shall have been increased while he was a member, during the 
term for which he was elected, and for one year after the expiration of such 
term; and no person holding a commission or appointment under the United States, 
except postmasters, shall be a member of the legislative assembly, or shall hold 
any office under the government of said Territory.
Sec. 9. Courts; judicial districts; jurisdiction of courts. And be it further 
enacted, That the judicial power of said Territory shall be vested in a supreme 
court, district courts, probate courts, and in justices of the peace. The 
supreme court shall consist of a chief justice and two associate justices, any 
two of whom shall constitute a quorum, and who shall hold a term at the seat of 
government of said Territory annually, and they shall hold their offices during 
the period of four years. The said Territory shall be divided into three 
judicial districts, and a district court shall be held in each of said districts 
by one of the justices of the supreme court, at such time and place as may be 
prescribed by law; and the said judges shall, after their appointments, 
respectively, reside in the districts which shall be assigned them. The 
jurisdiction of the several courts herein provided for, both appellate and 
original, and that of the probate courts and of the justices of the peace, shall 
be as limited by law: Provided, That justices of the peace shall not have 
jurisdiction of any matter in controversy when the title of boundaries of land 
may be in dispute, or where the debt or sum claimed shall exceed one hundred 
dollars; and the said supreme and district courts, respectively, shall possess 
chancery as well as common-law jurisdiction; and authority for redress of all 
wrongs committed against the Constitution or laws of the United States, or of 
the Territory, affecting persons or property. Each district court, or the judge 
thereof, shall appoint its clerk, who shall also be the register in chancery, 
and shall keep his office at the place where the court may be held. Writs of 
error, bills of exception, and appeals, shall be allowed in all cases from the 
final decisions of said district courts to the supreme court, under such 
regulations as may be prescribed by law; but in no case removed to the supreme 
court shall trial by jury be allowed in said court. The supreme court, or the 
justices thereof, shall appoint its own clerk, and every clerk shall hold his 
office at the pleasure of the court for which he shall have been appointed. 
Writs of error and appeals from the final decisions of said supreme court, shall 
be allowed, and may be taken to the Supreme Court of the United States, in the 
same manner and under the same regulations as from the circuit courts of the 
United States, where the value of the property, or the amount in controversy, to 
be ascertained by the oath or affirmation of either party, or other competent 
witness, shall exceed one thousand dollars; and each of the said district courts 
shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction in all cases arising under the 
Constitution and laws of the United States as is vested in the circuit and 
district courts of the United States; and the said supreme and district courts 
of the said Territory, and the respective judges thereof, shall and may grant 
writs of habeas corpus in all cases in which the same are grantable by the 
judges of the United States in the District of Columbia; and the first six days 
of every term of said courts, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, shall be 
appropriated to the trial of causes arising under the said Constitution and 
laws; and writs of error and appeals in all such cases shall be made to the 
supreme court of said Territory the same as in other cases. The said clerk shall 
receive, in all such cases, the same fees which the clerks of the district 
courts of Utah Territory now receive for similar services.
NEVADA CASES.
Jurisdictional limit applies to all cases, regardless of theory of recovery. 
Provision of section 9 of act organizing territory which provided that justices' 
courts did not have jurisdiction where debt or sum claimed exceeded one hundred 
dollars (see NRS 4.370 and 73.010) applied to all cases cognizable in justices' 
courts, whether they arose from contract or in tort. Armstrong v. Paul, 1 Nev. 
134 (1865)
Sec. 10. Attorney and marshal for territory: Appointment; term; duties. And be 
it further enacted, That there shall be appointed an attorney for said 
Territory, who shall continue in office for four years, unless sooner removed by 
the President, and who shall receive the same fees and salary as the attorney of 
the United States for the present Territory of Utah. There shall also be a 
marshal for the Territory appointed, who shall hold his office for four years, 
unless sooner removed by the President, and who shall execute all processes 
issuing from the said courts when exercising their jurisdiction as circuit and 
district courts of the United States; he shall perform the duties, be subject to 
the same regulations and penalties, and be entitled to the same fees as the 
marshal of the district court of the United States for the present Territory of 
Utah, and shall, in addition, be paid two hundred dollars annually as a 
compensation for extra services.
Sec. 11. Presidential appointment of governor, secretary, justices, attorney and 
marshal; compensation of legislative assembly. And be it further enacted, That 
the governor, secretary, chief justice and associate justices, attorney, and 
marshal, shall be nominated and, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, appointed by the President of the United States. The governor and 
secretary to be appointed as aforesaid shall, before they act as such, 
respectively take an oath or affirmation before the district judge, or some 
justice of the peace in the limits of said Territory duly authorized to 
administer oaths and affirmations by the laws now in force therein, or before 
the Chief Justice or some associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United 
States, to support the Constitution of the United States and faithfully to 
discharge the duties of their respective offices; which said oaths, when so 
taken, shall be certified by the person by whom the same shall have been taken, 
and such certificates shall be received and recorded by the secretary among the 
executive proceedings; and the chief justice and associate justices, and all 
other civil officers in said Territory, before they act as such, shall take a 
like oath or affirmation before the said governor or secretary, or some judge or 
justice of the peace of the Territory who may be duly commissioned and 
qualified, which said oath or affirmation shall be certified and transmitted by 
the person taking the same to the secretary, to be by him recorded as aforesaid; 
and afterwards the like oath or affirmation shall be taken, certified, and 
recorded in such manner and form as may be prescribed by law. The governor shall 
receive an annual salary of fifteen hundred dollars as governor, and one 
thousand dollars as superintendent of Indian Affairs; the chief justice and 
associate justices shall each receive an annual salary of eighteen hundred 
dollars; the secretary shall receive an annual salary of eighteen hundred 
dollars. The said salaries shall be paid quarter-yearly at the Treasury of the 
United States. The members of the legislative assembly shall be entitled to 
receive three dollars each per day during their attendance at the session 
thereof, and three dollars for every twenty miles travel in going to and 
returning from the said sessions, estimated according to the nearest usually 
travelled route. There shall be appropriated annually the sum of one thousand 
dollars, to be expended by the governor to defray the contingent expenses of the 
Territory. There shall also be appropriated annually a sufficient sum, to be 
expended by the secretary of the Territory, and upon an estimate to be made by 
the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, to defray the expenses of 
the legislative assembly, the printing of the laws, and other incidental 
expenses; and the secretary of the Territory shall annually account to the 
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for the manner in which the 
aforesaid sum shall have been expended.
Sec. 12. First meeting of legislative assembly; seat of government. And be it 
further enacted, That the legislative assembly of the Territory of Nevada shall 
hold its first session at such time and place in said Territory as the governor 
thereof shall appoint and direct; and at said first session, or as soon 
thereafter as they shall deem expedient, the governor and legislative assembly 
shall proceed to locate and establish the seat of government for said Territory 
at such place as they may deem eligible; which place, however, shall thereafter 
be subject to be changed by the said governor and legislative assembly.
Sec. 13. Delegate to House of Representatives of United States: Election, rights 
and privileges. And be it further enacted, That a delegate to the House of 
Representatives of the United States, to serve during each Congress of the 
United States, may be elected by the voters qualified to elect members of the 
legislative assembly, who shall be entitled to the same rights and privileges as 
are exercised and enjoyed by the delegates from the several other Territories of 
the United States to the said House of Representatives. The first election shall 
be held at such time and places, and be conducted in such manner, as the 
governor shall appoint and direct; and at all subsequent elections, the times, 
places, and manner of holding elections shall be prescribed by law. The person 
having the greatest number of votes shall be declared by the governor to be duly 
elected, and a certificate thereof shall be given accordingly.
Sec. 14. Sixteenth and thirty-sixth sections in each township reserved for 
schools. And be it further enacted, That when the land in said Territory shall 
be surveyed, under the direction of the Government of the United States, 
preparatory to bringing the same into market, sections numbered sixteen and 
thirty-six in each township in said Territory shall be, and the same is hereby 
reserved for the purpose of being applied to schools in the States hereafter to 
be erected out of the same.
Sec. 15. Judicial districts: Organization; assignment of judges. And be it 
further enacted, That temporarily, and until otherwise provided by law, the 
governor of said Territory may define the judicial districts of said Territory 
and assign the judges who may be appointed for said Territory to the several 
districts, and also appoint the times and places for holding courts in the 
several counties or subdivisions in each of said judicial districts, by 
proclamation to be issued by him; but the legislative assembly, at their first 
or any subsequent session, may organize, alter, or modify such judicial 
districts, and assign the judges, and alter the times and places of holding the 
courts, as to them shall seem proper and convenient.
Sec. 16. Applicability of United States Constitution. And be it further enacted, 
That the Constitution and all laws of the United States which are not locally 
inapplicable shall have the same force and effect within the said Territory of 
Nevada as elsewhere within the United States.
Sec. 17. Surveyor general: Appointment, powers and duties. And be it further 
enacted, That the President of the United States, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate, shall be, and he is hereby, authorized to appoint a 
surveyor general for Nevada, who shall locate his office at such place as the 
Secretary of the Interior shall from time to time direct, and whose duties, 
powers, obligations, responsibilities, compensation, and allowances for clerk 
hire, office rent, fuel, and incidental expenses, shall be the same as those of 
the surveyor general of New Mexico, under the direction of the Secretary of the 
Interior, and such instructions as he may from time to time deem it advisable to 
give him.
Approved, March 2, 1861.



ACT OF CONGRESS (1864) ENABLING THE PEOPLE
OF NEVADA TO FORM A CONSTITUTION
AND STATE GOVERNMENT

[See 13 United States Statutes at Large (1864), pp. 30-32. Section leadlines 
have been supplied by the Legislative Counsel of the State of 
Nevada.]

Chap. XXXVI. An Act to enable the People of Nevada to form a Constitution and 
State Government, and for the Admission of such State into the Union on an equal 
Footing with the original States.
Section 1. Authorization for formation of state. Be it enacted by the Senate and 
House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 
That the inhabitants of that portion of the territory of Nevada included in the 
boundaries hereinafter designated be, and they are hereby, authorized to form 
for themselves, out of said territory, a state government, with the name 
aforesaid, which said state, when formed, shall be admitted into the Union upon 
an equal footing with the original states, in all respects whatsoever.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 1, 33.
Sec. 2. Boundaries of state. And be it further enacted, That the said state of 
Nevada shall consist of all the territory included within the following 
boundaries, to wit: Commencing at a point formed by the intersection of the 
thirty-eighth degree of longitude west from Washington with the thirty-seventh 
degree of north latitude; thence due west along said thirty-seventh degree of 
north latitude to the eastern boundary line of the state of California; thence 
in a northwesterly direction along the said eastern boundary line of the state 
of California to the forty-third degree of longitude west from Washington; 
thence north along said forty-third degree of west longitude and said eastern 
boundary line of the state of California to the forty-second degree of north 
latitude; thence due east along the said forty-second degree of north latitude 
to a point formed by its intersection with the aforesaid thirty-eighth degree of 
longitude west from Washington; thence due south down said thirty-eighth degree 
of west longitude to the place of beginning.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 33, 525.
Sec. 3. Constitutional convention: Qualified electors. And be it further 
enacted, That all persons qualified by law to vote for representatives to the 
general assembly of said territory, at the date of the passage of this act shall 
be qualified to be elected, and they are authorized to vote for and choose 
representatives to form a convention, under such rules and regulations as the 
governor of said territory may prescribe; and also to vote upon the acceptance 
or rejection of such constitution as may be formed by said convention, under 
such rules and regulations as the said convention may prescribe; and if any of 
said citizens are enlisted in the army of the United States, and are still 
within said territory, they shall be permitted to vote at their place of 
rendezvous; and [if] any are absent from said territory, by reason of their 
enlistment in the army of the United States, they shall be permitted to vote at 
their place of service, under the rules and regulations in each case to be 
prescribed as aforesaid; and the aforesaid representatives to form the aforesaid 
convention shall be apportioned among the several counties in said territory in 
proportion to the population as near as may be; and said apportionment shall be 
made for said territory by the governor, United States district-attorney, and 
chief justice thereof, or any two of them; and the governor of said territory 
shall, by proclamation on or before the first Monday of May next, order an 
election of the representatives as aforesaid to be held on the first Monday in 
June thereafter throughout the territory, and such election shall be conducted 
in the same manner as is prescribed by the laws of said territory regulating 
elections therein for members of the house of representatives, and the number of 
members to said convention shall be the same as now constitute both branches of 
the legislature of the aforesaid territory.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 124, 125, 131, 252, 787
Sec. 4. Authorization to form constitution and state government; limitations. 
And be it further enacted, That the members of the convention, thus elected, 
shall meet at the capital of said territory on the first Monday in July next, 
and, after organization, shall declare, on behalf of the people of said 
territory, that they adopt the constitution of the United States. Whereupon the 
said convention shall be, and it is hereby, authorized to form a constitution 
and state government for said territory: Provided, That the constitution, when 
formed, shall be republican, and not repugnant to the constitution of the United 
States, and the principles of the Declaration of Independence: And provided 
further, That said convention shall provide, by an ordinance irrevocable, 
without the consent of the United States and the people of said state:
First. That there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said 
state, otherwise than in the punishment of crimes, whereof the party shall have 
been duly convicted.
Second. That perfect toleration of religious sentiment shall be secured, and no 
inhabitant of said state shall ever be molested in person or property on account 
of his or her mode of religious worship.
Third. That the people inhabiting said territory do agree and declare that they 
forever disclaim all right and title to the unappropriated public lands lying 
within said territory, and that the same shall be and remain at the sole and 
entire disposition of the United States; and that the lands belonging to 
citizens of the United States residing without the said state shall never be 
taxed higher than the land belonging to the residents thereof; and that no taxes 
shall be imposed by said state on lands or property therein belonging to, or 
which may hereafter be purchased by, the United States.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 66.
 
Sec. 5. Constitution to be submitted to popular vote. And be it further enacted, 
That in case a constitution and state government shall be formed for the people 
of said territory of Nevada, in compliance with the provisions of this act, that 
said convention forming the same shall provide by ordinance for submitting said 
constitution to the people of said state for their ratification or rejection at 
an election to be held on the first Wednesday of September, one thousand eight 
hundred and sixty-four, at such places and under such regulations as may be 
prescribed therein, at which election the lawful voters of said new state shall 
vote directly for or against the proposed constitution, and the returns of said 
election shall be made to the acting governor of the territory, who, with the 
United States district-attorney and chief justice of said territory, or any two 
of them, shall canvass the same, and if a majority of legal votes shall be cast 
for said constitution in said proposed state, the said acting governor shall 
certify the same to the President of the United States, together with a copy of 
said constitution and ordinances; whereupon it shall be the duty of the 
President of the United States to issue his proclamation declaring the state 
admitted into the Union on an equal footing with the original states, without 
any further action whatever on the part of congress.
[Amended in 1864. See 13 United States Statutes at Large (1864), p. 85. (Chap. 
XCIV. An Act to amend an Act entitled "An Act to enable the People of Nevada to 
form a Constitution and State Government, and for the Admission of such State 
into the Union on an equal Footing with the original States.")]
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 124, 131, 133, 135.
Sec. 6. Representation in House of Representatives of the United States. And be 
it further enacted, That until the next general census shall be taken said state 
of Nevada shall be entitled to one representative in the house of 
representatives of the United States, which representative, together with the 
governor and state and other officers provided for in said constitution, may be 
elected on 
the same day a vote is taken for or against the proposed constitution and state 
government.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 34.
Sec. 7. Grant of public lands for support of common schools. And be it further 
enacted, That sections numbers sixteen and thirty-six, in every township, and 
where such sections have been sold or otherwise disposed of by any act of 
congress, other lands equivalent thereto in legal subdivisions of not less than 
one quarter-section, and as contiguous as may be, shall be, and are hereby, 
granted to said state for the support of common schools.
NEVADA CASES.
Reservation of mineral lands. In action of ejectment to recover lands claimed by 
plaintiff under patent from State of Nevada, and by defen-
dant under mining patent from Federal Govern-ment issued after state patent but 
prior to survey of land, defendant prevailed, because although lands were 
originally included in federal grant to 
state by section 7 of act enabling people to form state, grant was modified to 
reserve mineral lands to Federal Government by Act of Congress prior to 
disposition of any of lands, and modification was accepted by state by 
legislative act. Heydenfeldt v. Daney Gold & Silver Mining Co., 10 Nev. 290 
(1875), aff'd, 93 U.S. 634, 23 L. Ed. 995 (1877), distinguished, Shoemaker v. 
Hatch, 13 Nev. 261, at 267 (1878)
Date when title passed. Grant of 16th and 36th sections to state in section 7 of 
act enabling people to form state was grant in praesenti, in nature of float, 
taking effect upon specific tracts of land as soon as tracts were surveyed, but 
not before. Any such sections pre-empted prior to survey did not pass to state, 
but other equivalent lands were granted in lieu thereof. Layton v. Farrell, 11 
Nev. 451 (1876), distinguished, Shoemaker v. Hatch, 13 Nev. 261, at 267 (1878)
Sec. 8. Grant of lands to state for erecting public buildings. And be it further 
enacted, That provided the state of Nevada shall be admitted into the Union, in 
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this act, that twenty entire 
sections of the unappropriated public lands within said state, to be selected 
and located by direction of the legislature thereof, on or before the first day 
of January, anno Domini eighteen hundred and sixty-eight, shall be, and they are 
hereby, granted, in legal subdivisions of not less than one hundred and sixty 
acres, to said state, for the purpose of erecting public buildings at the 
capital of said state, for legislative and judicial purposes, in such manner as 
the legislature shall prescribe.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 34.
Sec. 9. Grant of lands to state for erecting state prison. And be it further 
enacted, That twenty other entire sections of land, as aforesaid, to be selected 
and located as aforesaid, in legal subdivisions, as aforesaid, shall be, and 
they are hereby, granted to said state for the purpose of erecting a suitable 
building for a penitentiary or state prison in the manner aforesaid.
Sec. 10. Five percent of subsequent sales of public lands by United States to be 
paid to state for public roads and irrigation. And be it further enacted, That 
five percentum of the proceeds of the sales of all public lands lying within 
said state, which shall be sold by the United States subsequent to the admission 
of said state into the Union, after deducting all the expenses incident to the 
same, shall be paid to the said state for the purpose of making and improving 
public roads, constructing ditches or canals, to effect a general system of 
irrigation of the agricultural land in the state, as the legislature shall 
direct.
Sec. 11. Applicability of laws of United States after admission; state to 
constitute one federal judicial district. And be it further enacted, That from 
and after the admission of the said state of Nevada into the Union, in pursuance 
of this act, the laws of the United States, not locally inapplicable, shall have 
the same force and effect within the said state as elsewhere within the United 
States, and said state shall constitute one judicial district, and be called the 
district of Nevada.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 34.
Approved, March 21, 1864.
Facts About Nevada 

The Territory of Nevada was created by an Act of Congress, signed by 
President James Buchanan and became effective March 2, 1861. President Abraham 
Lincoln appointed James W. Nye of New York as Nevada's first Territorial 
Governor.

On October 31, 1864, President Lincoln proclaimed Nevada's admission to the 
Union as the 36th state. The creation of the Nevada Territory, and its admission 
to the Union, were related to both the Civil War and the mineral wealth of the 
Comstock Lode. During the next 75 years, many mining towns flourished, if only 
briefly, all over the state. Since 1931, tourism, particularly entertainment and 
legalized gaming, have become increasingly important to Nevada's economy. Mining 
also has rebounded in recent years, and Nevada now produces more gold than any 
other state. Federal legislation enacted in 1986 created the Great Basin 
National Park, the only national park in the state, which includes the area 
around Wheeler Peak and Lehman Caves in eastern Nevada. 

Nevada Nicknames: Sagebrush State, Silver State, Battle-Born State

The origin of the state's name is Spanish, meaning "snow-capped."

Preliminary population estimate as of November, 1998: 1,852,650 Rank: 39th (1990) 

Area: 110,540 square miles, 86 percent federally controlled Rank: 7th largest 

Capital: Carson City, population - 51,860 (November, 1998) 

Most populous city: Las Vegas - 441,230 (November, 1998) 

Most populous county: Clark - 1,255,200 (November, 1998) 

Highest elevation: Boundary Peak in Esmeralda County - 13,140 feet 

Lowest elevation: On the Colorado River in Clark County - 470 feet

State Artifact - 
The Tule Duck was created by early Nevadans almost 2,000 years ago. Discovered 
by archeologists in 1924 during an excavation at Lovelock Cave, the 11 decoys 
are each formed of a bundle of bullrush (tule) stems, bound together and shaped 
to resemble a canvasback duck. 

State Fossil - 
The Ichthyosaur (Shonisaurus) fossil was found in Berlin, east of Gabbs. Nevada 
is the only state to possess a complete skeleton (approximately 55 feet long) of 
this extinct marine reptile. 

State Bird - 
The Mountain Bluebird (Sialia currucoides) lives in the Nevada high country and 
destroys many harmful insects. It is a member of the thrush family and its song 
is a clear, short warble like the caroling of a robin. The male is azure blue 
with a white belly, while the female is brown with a bluish rump, tail, and 
wings. 

State Animal - 
The Desert Bighorn (or Nelson) Sheep (Ovis canadensis nelsoni) is smaller than 
its Rocky Mountain cousin but has a wider spread of horns. The bighorn is 
well-suited for Nevada's mountainous desert country because it can survive for 
long periods without water. The large rams stand about 4 1/2 feet tall and can 
weigh as much as 175 pounds. 

State Fish - 
The Lahontan Cutthroat Trout (Salmo clarki henshawi), a native trout found in 14 
of the state's 17 counties, is adapted to habitats ranging from high mountain 
creeks and alpine lakes to warm, intermittent lowland streams and alkaline lakes 
where no other trout can live. 

State Reptile - 
The Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii), the largest reptile in the 
Southwestern United States, lives in the extreme southern parts of Nevada. Its 
hard, dome-shaped shell ranges from tan to black in color. This reptile spends 
much of its life in underground burrows to escape the harsh summer heat and 
winter cold. The desert tortoise can live to be more than 70 years old. 

State Flower - 
Sagebrush (Artemisia tridentata) grows abundantly in the deserts of the Western 
United States. A member of the wormwood family, sagebrush is a branching bush (1 
to 12 feet high) and grows in regions where other kinds of vegetation cannot 
subsist. Known for its pleasant aroma, its gray-green twigs, and pale yellow 
flowers, sagebrush is an important winter food for sheep and cattle. 

State Trees- 
The Single-Leaf Pinon (Pinus monophylla) is an aromatic pine tree with short, 
stiff needles and gnarled branches. The tree grows in coarse, rocky soils and 
rock crevices. Though its normal height is about 15 feet, the single-leaf pinon 
can grow as high as 50 feet under ideal conditions. 

The Bristlecone Pine (Pinus aristata) shares the state tree designation. The 
bristlecone pine is the oldest living thing on Earth, with some specimens in 
Nevada more than 4,000 years of age. The tree can be found at high elevations. 
Normal height for older trees is about 15 to 30 feet, although some have 
attained a height of 60 feet. Diameter growth continues throughout the long life 
of the tree, resulting in massive trunks with a few contorted limbs.

State Grass - 
Indian Ricegrass (Oryzopsis hymenoides), once a staple food source for Nevada 
Indians, now provides valuable feed for wildlife and range livestock. This tough 
native grass, which is found throughout the state, is known for its ability to 
reseed and establish itself on sites damaged by fire or over grazing. 

State Rock - 
Sandstone, in its more traditionally recognized form or as quartzite, is found 
throughout the state. In areas such as the Valley of Fire State Park and Red 
Rock Canyon Recreational Lands, both near Las Vegas, it provides some of 
Nevada's most spectacular scenery. The State Capitol, and the former United 
States Mint, are built of sandstone.

State Precious Gemstone - 
Among the many gemstones found in Nevada, the Virgin Valley Black Fire Opal is 
one of the most beautiful. The Virgin Valley in northern Nevada is the only 
place in North America where the Black Fire Opal is found in any significant 
quantity.

State Semi-precious Gemstone - 
Nevada Turquoise, sometimes called the "Jewel of the Desert," is found in many 
parts of the state. 

State Song - 
In 1933, the Legislature adopted "Home Means Nevada" as the official state song. 
Mrs. Bertha Raffetto of Reno wrote the song to honor the state. The refrain of 
the song goes as follows:
    "Home" means Nevada, "Home" means the hills, "Home" means the sage and the 
    pines. Out by the Truckee's silvery rills. Out where the sun always shines. 
    There is a land that l love the best, Fairer than all I can see. Right in 
    the heart of the golden west "Home" means Nevada to me. 
    (Special thanks to Mrs Alami's and Paragini's 3rd Grade classes at Greenbrae 
    Elementary for recording the state song) 
State Metal - 
Silver (Ag) 

State Colors - 
Silver and Blue


Facts about the Nevada Legislature 

Sessions 
Regular sessions of the Legislature begin the first Monday in February of 
odd-numbered years. Nevada is one of seven states that have true biennial 
sessions. 
Before the 1998 General Election, the length of the legislative sessions in 
Nevada depended upon the time required to review the spending proposals of the 
state agencies and adopt a budget. At the 1998 General Election, Nevada voters 
approved a constitutional amendment limiting future regular biennial sessions to 
120 days. The amendment also requires the governor to submit the executive 
budget to the Legislature two weeks before the start of session. Nevada has more 
than 184 state agencies with about 463 budget units. The 1997 Regular Session 
lasted 169 calendar days, which tied 1995 as the second longest session in 
Nevada history. The 1981, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1995 sessions ran 
137, 126, 135, 151, 167, 161 , and 166 days, respectively. 

The Governor may also call the Legislature into a special session. A l-day 
special session in 1989 was the 16th special session in the past 125 years. 
The Legislature Between Sessions 
The Legislature has an ongoing staff agency known as the Legislative Counsel 
Bureau. This agency encompasses the Fiscal, Legal, and Research Divisions, which 
provide support for the Legislature. It also includes the Audit Division whose 
job consists of auditing the accounts of state agencies, and an Administrative 
Division, which provides accounting, security and various "housekeeping" 
functions. 

The Legislative Counsel Bureau is supervised by the Legislative Commission, a 
body of 12 legislators, six from each house. The commission also takes actions 
on behalf of the legislative branch of government when the full Legislature is 
not in session. This body meets every few months between sessions to provide 
guidance to staff of the Legislative Counsel Bureau and to deal with other 
interim matters. 

The Interim Finance Committee, composed of the members of the Senate Committee 
on Finance and the Assembly Committee on Ways and Means from the preceding 
session, makes fiscal decisions for the Legislature during the period between 
regular sessions. The Interim Finance Committee endeavors to maintain an 
adequate fund balance to meet unforeseen financial emergencies. 

Every member of the Legislature is involved in interim subcommittee work between 
sessions. In addition, several statutory committees meet regularly, including 
the Committees on Health Care, High-Level Radioactive Waste, and Public Lands. 
During each regular session, the Legislature passes several bills and 
resolutions directing the Legislative Commission to study particular subjects 
and report when the Legislature reconvenes. The commission accomplishes its task 
by creating subcommittees drawn from the entire membership of the Legislature 
and assigning staff resources to the subcommittees. The interim subcommittees 
hold hearings, direct research and deliberate on proposed legislation for the 
next session of the Legislature. 

Qualifications of Legislators
To be elected to either house of the Legislature, a person must be at least 21 
years of age at the time of the election, a resident of the state for 1 year and 
a qualified elector in the district to be represented. 
Terms of Office 
All members of the Assembly are elected for 2-year terms at the general election 
held in even-numbered years. Members of the Senate are elected for 4-year terms, 
with half being elected in one general election and the other half in the next. 
Compensation
Legislators receive a salary of $130 per day for the first 60 days of each 
regular session and the first 20 days of each special session. In addition, a 
per diem allowance of $80 per day is authorized by statute. Legislators receive 
additional allowances for stationery, postage, travel, and telephone use. 


Organizing the Legislature 

When the Legislature convenes on the first monday of February of odd-numbered 
years, there are no operative rules and, in the Assembly, no presiding officer. 
The Secretary of State calls the Assembly to order at the beginning of a session 
and appoints a Temporary Chief Clerk. After roll call, the Secretary of State 
appoints a Temporary Committee on Legislative Functions, which examines the 
election certificate of each member of the Assembly and recommends the seating 
of legislators whose certificates are in order. Once the members of the Assembly 
have been sworn in by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, the Secretary of 
State customarily asks for nominations for Speaker. Since the speakership is 
usually predetermined in caucus, by tradition, the procedure is to nominate only 
one candidate, who is elected unanimously. The Secretary of State then turns the 
chair over to the new Speaker, who proceeds to conduct elections for Speaker pro 
Tempore and Chief Clerk of the Assembly. After the Assembly is organized and 
standing rules are adopted, committees are appointed to inform the Senate and 
Governor that the Assembly is ready for business. 

On the Senate side, the Lieutenant Governor presides over the chamber as 
President, in accordance with the provisions of the Nevada Constitution. The 
procedures followed, with the exception of the election of a presiding officer 
(which is dispensed with in the Senate), parallel those of the Assembly. The 
major difference is that the Senate is not an entirely new body. As near as is 
possible to one-half of the Senators are elected at each general election, the 
remainder serving in a holdover capacity. 

In the past, shortly after both Houses had organized, they met in joint session 
in the Assembly Chambers to hear the "State of the State" address by the 
Governor. In 1999, the Governor delivered his address on January 18th, two weeks 
before the Legislature convened. The Governor addressed the Legislature earlier 
in 1999 because he is now required by the constitution to submit his budget 
proposal to the Legislature two weeks before it convenes. In this message to the 
Legislature, the Governor discusses his proposed budget, outlines the major 
problems confronting the state, and proposes legislative solutions for the 
consideration of the Houses. Under usual circumstances, the speech highlights 
the most important elements of the Governor's party's legislative program. It 
constitutes the "action" agenda of the session, for even if the legislative 
majority party is not of the same political persuasion, the Governor's message 
will delineate the significant sphere of issues to be resolved. 
Long before the Legislature convenes in February, the legislative process is set 
in motion in subtle and frequently intangible ways. Social problems enter the 
forum of public debate and, through the exchange of ideas among the citizenry, 
certain opinions and issues are given the impetus needed to find expression in 
the legislative arena. Contending positions on public questions are identified, 
and proposed solutions to problems and conflicts are advocated in the press, 
among the people, in the academic community, within various interest groups, and 
among concerned governmental agencies and officials. But whatever the source of 
an idea for resolving a civic issue, that idea must be translated into a 
concrete legislative proposal for action, a bill or resolution, before it can 
formally enter the legislative forum for consideration. 


FLOOR LEADERS 

In addition to the formal leadership in the two Houses of the Legislature, the 
partisan nature of the chambers makes it necessary to use party leadership 
positions to manage the legislative workload. In both Houses, Majority and 
Minority Floor Leaders of their respective parties are selected during party 
caucuses, and their election is announced from the floor of the Houses. The 
Senate and Assembly also have, by custom, established the positions of Assistant 
Majority Floor Leader, Assistant Minority Floor Leader, Majority Whip, and 
Minority Whip. Floor leaders are not legal officers of the Houses, since their 
offices do not exist under provisions of law. In Nevada, the Senate Majority 
Leader is the actual leader of the Senate, with powers similar to those of the 
Speaker of the Assembly. 

Usually, the Majority Floor Leader in each House refers to committee those bills 
that are received from the other House and works closely with the presiding 
officer on parliamentary operations involving legislation being considered on 
the floor. Thus, it is obvious that a thorough knowledge of parliamentary 
procedure is an important attribute of a competent Majority Floor Leader. 
Floor leaders are party officials in the Legislature and are responsible for 
maintaining party discipline in their respective Houses. Straight party voting 
is relatively uncommon in the Nevada Legislature, as members customarily 
exercise wide latitude in voting. But in certain critical areas (as in the 
organization of the Assembly), the Majority and Minority Floor Leaders are 
expected to call a caucus to determine their partys' stance on an issue. Once a 
position is agreed upon, the floor leaders act as "whips" to solidify partisan 
support for the caucus decision. The tenure of the floor leaders extends during 
the interim between regular sessions of the Legislature and until the election 
of their successors after the general election. 


LEGISLATIVE OFFICERS: ASSEMBLY 

The presiding officer of the Nevada Assembly is the Speaker. Unlike the 

President of the Senate, the Speaker of the Assembly is elected from among the 
membership of the Assembly. The Assembly Standing Rules provide that the Speaker 
shall, among other things: (1) preserve order and decorum and have general 
direction of the chamber; (2) decide all questions of order, subject to each 
member's right to appeal; (3) have the right to assign the duties of the Chair 
to any member for up to 1 legislative day; (4) have the power to accredit the 
persons who act as representatives of the news media and assign their seats; (5) 
sign all bills and resolutions passed by the Legislature and all subpoenas 
issued by the Assembly or any committee thereof; and (6) vote on final passage 
of a bill or resolution. The Speaker is not required to vote in ordinary 
legislative proceedings except when such a vote would be decisive. In all aye 
and nay votes, the Speaker's name is required to be called last. The Speaker is 
third in the line of succession to the governorship, behind the Lieutenant 
Governor and President pro Tempore of the Senate. The tenures of the President 
pro Tempore and the Speaker continue beyond the end of the session and until 
their successors are designated after the general election. 

It has been customary for the Assembly to elect a Speaker pro Tempore to preside 
in the temporary absence of the Speaker. This officer's duties are comparable to 
those of the President pro Tempore of the Senate, exclusive of the right of 
succession to the governorship. Assembly Standing Rule 1 requires that if a 
permanent vacancy occurs in the office of Speaker, the Assembly shall select a 
new Speaker. The Assembly also elects a Chief Clerk, who functions in the same 
fashion as the Secretary of the Senate. 


STANDING COMMITTEES 

Each House of the Nevada Legislature has its own standing committees, the 
members of which are appointed by the presiding officer in accordance with 
current standing rules. The number of members is determined by these rules, and 
many times there are changes made, especially in the Assembly, at the beginning 
of each session. In the Senate, the composition and leadership of the committees 
is usually determined in party caucuses. In the Assembly, the Speaker, who is 
usually a member of the majority party, makes the committee appointments and 
uses such appointments as part of the campaign to be Speaker. The Speaker also 
designates the Chairman and Vice Chairman of each committee. Usually, minority 
party memberships in Assembly committees are determined in caucuses of the 
minority party, and the Speaker appoints the members as agreed to in such 
caucuses. With some exceptions, the general practice is for the majority party 
to have a bare majority of the members in each committee (or most committees) 
when total membership of a House is closely divided between both political 
parties. When there is a substantial margin of majority party members, however, 
this practice has been modified to allow a predominance of majority party 
members on each standing committee. Basic rules for the functioning of 
committees are contained in the standing rules of the Houses and Mason's Manual 
of Legislative Procedure, which has been adopted by both Houses as the basis of 
parliamentary practice in all cases in which it is applicable and in which it is 
not inconsistent with the standing rules of the Houses.

Committees are the workshops of the Legislature. Visitors to the two chambers 
are often amazed at the rapidity with which business is dispatched, little 
realizing that long hours in committee sessions have transpired prior to any 
floor action on a bill. It is in committee that hearings are held, testimony 
from interested parties is taken, and bills are analyzed line by line for their 
legal and social merits. 

Committees make several types of recommendations on legislative measures that 
come before them for consideration. By use of a standard form containing several 
preprinted recommendations, an Assembly committee may report a bill back to the 
whole House with a: "Do pass"; "Amend, and do pass, as amended"; or a "Do pass, 
as amended" recommendation. Such recommendations mean that a committee considers 
a bill to have sufficient merit to justify its enactment, either as introduced 
or with appropriate amendments. Other recommendations concerning a bill include: 
(1) a report that the bill be passed and re-referred, or amended and 
re-referred, to a specified committee; (2) "Do not pass" (in which case the 
committee is recommending its rejection by the whole House); and (3) "Do pass, 
and place on consent calendar." This procedure is discussed later under the 
heading "Consent Calendar." 

A committee may also report a bill "Without recommendation," or "Amend, but 
without recommendation," which means that the committee was unable to reach a 
conclusion on what it believes should be the action to be taken by the whole 
House. On occasion, a committee will report a bill to the floor with both a 
majority and minority recommendation. 

Three Assembly Rules (46, 47, and 48) require that records be kept of committee 
votes on bills or resolutions and of committee proceedings. Furthermore, these 
records, minutes, and documents are required to be filed in the offices of the 
Legislative Counsel Bureau upon adjournment sine die. 
Standing committees may perform other functions besides considering legislation. 
For example, Senate Rule 54 encourages each standing committee of the Senate to 
plan and conduct a general review of selected programs of state agencies or 
other areas of public interest within the committee's jurisdiction. 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
In addition to standing committees, which continue in existence throughout a 
session, there are two other types of committees used by the Legislature in 
Nevada--Committees of the Whole and select committees. A Committee of the Whole 
is a committee composed of the entire membership of one of the Houses. It is 
usually convened so that the House can consider proposed legislation informally, 
without being bound by the requirements on formal consideration set out in the 
Nevada Constitution, statutes, and legislative rules. Such restrictions include 
limitations on debate and the necessity for maintaining a quorum. It is a 
procedural device for expediting House action. When the Senate forms itself into 
a Committee of the Whole, the Senator who made the motion for the Committee of 
the Whole is required to name a Chairman to preside over the committee. In the 
Assembly, the Speaker names a Chairman to preside. A Committee of the Whole is a 
temporary or "ad hoc" committee. At the conclusion of its deliberations, the 
Committee of the Whole (through its Chairman) normally reports its 
recommendations back to the House for formal action, in the same manner as 
standing or select committees. 


SELECT COMMITTEES AND 
COMMITTEES OF CONFERENCE 

Select committees are temporary committees, appointed for a special purpose, 
which may be the consideration of a particular bill or the performance of a 
ceremonial function (e.g., a Committee of Escort for the Governor). In Nevada, 
bills of application or primary concern to particular localities are sometimes 
referred to select committees composed of the legislative delegation from the 
area affected. 

A particularly important type of select committee is the Committee of 
Conference. Whenever a bill is passed by both Houses in differing forms because 
of amendments added by one of the Houses, and the two Houses cannot agree on 
identical language for the bill in question, each House appoints a number of 
conferees to meet with conferees of the other House to seek a resolution of the 
differences existing in the two versions of the bill. In a Committee of 
Conference, the conferees of one House may agree to amendments adopted in the 
other House or recede from the amendments adopted by their chamber. Conferees 
may also decide that new amendments or even new bills are necessary to reach 
accord. A Committee of Conference may consider the whole subject matter of a 
bill without restriction to the points in dispute and may make any changes it 
deems appropriate. Once the conferees reach an agreement, they report back to 
their respective Houses with their recommendations. The report of a conference 
committee may be adopted by acclamation, and such action is considered 
equivalent to the adoption of any amendments or changes recommended in the 
report, but conference reports themselves are not subject to amendment. 

The Joint Rules of the Senate and Assembly require that there be no more than 
two Committees of Conference on any bill or resolution. The rules also require 
that a majority of the members from each House on a committee be members who 
voted for the passage of the measure. No member who served on the first 
conference committee for a measure may be appointed to the second. If agreement 
cannot be reached by the second conference committee, the bill or resolution is 
dead. 


Facts about the Nevada Legislature (2nd time)

Sessions 
Regular sessions of the Legislature begin the first Monday in February of 
odd-numbered years. Nevada is one of seven states that have true biennial 
sessions. 

Before the 1998 General Election, the length of the legislative sessions in 
Nevada depended upon the time required to review the spending proposals of the 
state agencies and adopt a budget. At the 1998 General Election, Nevada voters 
approved a constitutional amendment limiting future regular biennial sessions to 
120 days. The amendment also requires the governor to submit the executive 
budget to the Legislature two weeks before the start of session. Nevada has more 
than 184 state agencies with about 463 budget units. The 1997 Regular Session 
lasted 169 calendar days, which tied 1995 as the second longest session in 
Nevada history. The 1981, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1995 sessions ran 
137, 126, 135, 151, 167, 161 , and 166 days, respectively. 

The Governor may also call the Legislature into a special session. A l-day 
special session in 1989 was the 16th special session in the past 125 years. 
The Legislature Between Sessions 
The Legislature has an ongoing staff agency known as the Legislative Counsel 
Bureau. This agency encompasses the Fiscal, Legal, and Research Divisions, which 
provide support for the Legislature. It also includes the Audit Division whose 
job consists of auditing the accounts of state agencies, and an Administrative 
Division, which provides accounting, security and various "housekeeping" 
functions. 

The Legislative Counsel Bureau is supervised by the Legislative Commission, a 
body of 12 legislators, six from each house. The commission also takes actions 
on behalf of the legislative branch of government when the full Legislature is 
not in session. This body meets every few months between sessions to provide 
guidance to staff of the Legislative Counsel Bureau and to deal with other 
interim matters. 

The Interim Finance Committee, composed of the members of the Senate Committee 
on Finance and the Assembly Committee on Ways and Means from the preceding 
session, makes fiscal decisions for the Legislature during the period between 
regular sessions. The Interim Finance Committee endeavors to maintain an 
adequate fund balance to meet unforeseen financial emergencies. 

Every member of the Legislature is involved in interim subcommittee work between 
sessions. In addition, several statutory committees meet regularly, including 
the Committees on Health Care, High-Level Radioactive Waste, and Public Lands. 
During each regular session, the Legislature passes several bills and 
resolutions directing the Legislative Commission to study particular subjects 
and report when the Legislature reconvenes. The commission accomplishes its task 
by creating subcommittees drawn from the entire membership of the Legislature 
and assigning staff resources to the subcommittees. The interim subcommittees 
hold hearings, direct research and deliberate on proposed legislation for the 
next session of the Legislature. 

Qualifications of Legislators
To be elected to either house of the Legislature, a person must be at least 21 
years of age at the time of the election, a resident of the state for 1 year and 
a qualified elector in the district to be represented. 

Terms of Office 
All members of the Assembly are elected for 2-year terms at the general election 
held in even-numbered years. Members of the Senate are elected for 4-year terms, 
with half being elected in one general election and the other half in the next. 

Compensation
Legislators receive a salary of $130 per day for the first 60 days of each 
regular session and the first 20 days of each special session. In addition, a 
per diem allowance of $80 per day is authorized by statute. Legislators receive 
additional allowances for stationery, postage, travel, and telephone use. 


Sessions 
Regular sessions of the Nevada Legislature are held biennially, in odd-numbered 
years. Beginning with the 1999 Regular Session, they are limited to 120 calendar 
days. Sessions convene on the 1st Monday in February in odd-numbered years next 
ensuing the election of members of the Assembly, unless the Governor convenes a 
special session at an earlier date by proclamation. Nevada's voters approved the 
120-day limitation through constitutional amendment at the 1998 General 
Election. The amendment also requires the governor to submit the executive 
budget to the Legislature two weeks before the start of session.
The Nevada Constitution limits the number of days for which legislators may 
receive compensation. Since 1987, the salary of members has been set by statute 
at $130 per day. However, the constitution forbids compensation for services to 
be paid to legislators for more than 60 calendar days for any regular session 
and 20 days for any special session. Reimbursement for actual expenses of 
members, however, may continue for the entire length of a session. After the 
repeal in 1958 of a constitutional provision setting a 60-day maximum limitation 
on the duration of a session, there was only one regular session of less than 60 
days, that being the single annual session of 1960, which lasted 55 days. From 
1975 through 1997, regular sessions in Nevada ran between 113 and 169 days. The 
1995 and 1997 Legislative Sessions lasted a record 169 days. Conversely, 
however, the 1989 Special Session was the shortest in history, lasting just over 
2 hours in the Senate. The record for the longest time a session has continued 
into the calendar year is held by the 1997 Session, lasting until July 7. 
Special sessions of the Legislature may only be convened on the call of the 
Governor. After both Houses have organized in special session, the Governor is 
required by the Nevada Constitution to state the purpose for which they have 
been convened. The Legislature may not enact any bills or joint resolutions 
pertaining to subjects other than those for which they were convened. The 
Governor, however, may expand the reasons for calling the Legislature into 
session at any time during that session, thereby reducing the restrictions on 
legislative initiative, and the Legislature, at times, has adopted simple or 
concurrent resolutions to express its sentiments on matters not contained in the 
Governor's call. 

Legislative activities, including committee hearings, are open to the public. 
The constitution also requires that neither House may, without the consent of 
the other, adjourn for more than 3 days, nor move to any place other than where 
it is holding its sessions. 


Procedure and Order of Business in the Senate and Assembly 

The Senate and the Assembly function in accordance with constitutional and 
statutory provisions as well as standing rules. The Senate and Assembly rules 
stipulate that Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure shall govern in all cases 
in which it is not inconsistent with the standing rules and orders and the Joint 
Rules of the two Houses. Under the Standing Rules of the Assembly, precedence of 
parliamentary authority is as follows: 
1. The Nevada Constitution. 
2. The Statutes of Nevada. 
3. The Standing Rules of the Assembly and the Joint Standing Rules of the Senate 
and Assembly. 
4. Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure. 
The same precedence, while not explicitly stated in its Standing Rules, is 
followed in the Senate. 
The Secretary of the Senate and the Chief Clerk of the Assembly serve as 
parliamentarians for their respective Houses. 
Under the rules of the Senate, the President calls the chamber to order at 11 
a.m., each day of sitting, unless the Senate has adjourned to some other hour. 
The Assembly also meets daily at 11 a.m., unless it has previously adjourned to 
some other hour. 
Quorum 
The Nevada Constitution states that a majority of all members elected to each 
House constitutes a quorum to transact business. However, a number smaller than 
this quorum may adjourn from day to day and may compel the attendance of absent 
members. 
Order of Business 
Each House has an official order of business incorporated into its Standing 
Rules. 
In the Senate, the order of business is as follows: 
1. Roll Call. 
2. Prayer by the Chaplain. 
3. Pledge of Allegiance to the Flag. 
4. Reading and Approval of the Journal. 
5. Reports of Standing Committees. 
6. Messages from the Governor. 
7. Messages from the Assembly. 
8. Communications from State Officers. 
9. Motions, Resolutions and Notices. 
10. Introduction, First Reading and Reference. 
11. Consent Calendar. 
12. Second Reading and Amendment. 
13. Business on General File and Third Reading. 
14. Unfinished Business. 
15. Special Orders of the Day. 
16. Remarks from the Floor; Introduction of Guests. 

On the Assembly side, the order of business varies slightly: 
1. Roll Call. 
2. Reading and Approval of Journal. 
3. Presentation of Petitions. 
4. Reports of Standing Committees. 
5. Reports of Select Committees. 
6. Communications. 
7. Messages from the Senate. 
8. Motions, Resolutions, and Notices. 
9. Introduction, First Reading and Reference. 
10. Consent Calendar. 
11. Second Reading and Amendment. 
12. General File and Third Reading. 
13. Unfinished Business of Preceding Day. 
14. Special Orders of the Day. 
15. Remarks from the Floor, limited to 10 minutes. 
Each item in the official order of business is considered as the House 
progresses through the day's program of business. From time to time, however, 
members may request that the presiding officer turn to items of business that 
are out of the usual order. 


ACT OF CONGRESS (1861) ORGANIZING THE TERRITORY OF NEVADA

[See 12 United States Statutes at Large (1863), pp. 209-214. Section leadlines 
have been supplied by the Legislative Counsel of the State of Nevada.]

Chap. LXXXIII.
An Act to organize the Territory of Nevada.
Boundaries of territory; Indian rights; division into two or more territories. 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of 
America in Congress assembled, That all that part of the territory of the United 
States, included within the following limits, to wit: beginning at the point of 
intersection of the forty-second degree of north latitude with the thirty-ninth 
degree of longitude west from Washington; thence, running south on the line of 
said thirty-ninth degree of west longitude, until it intersects the northern 
boundary line of the Territory of New Mexico; thence due west to the dividing 
ridge separating the waters of Carson Valley from those that flow into the 
Pacific; thence on said dividing ridge northwardly to the forty-first degree of 
north latitude; thence due north to the southern boundary line of the State of 
Oregon; thence due east to the place of beginning, be, and the same is hereby, 
erected into a temporary government by the name of the Territory of Nevada: 
Provided, That so much of the Territory within the present limits of the State 
of California shall not be included within this Territory until the State of 
California shall assent to the same by an act irrevocable without the consent of 
the United States: Provided, further, That nothing in this act contained shall 
be construed to impair the rights of person or property now pertaining to the 
Indians in said Territory, so long as such rights shall remain unextinguished by 
treaty between the United States and such Indians, or to include any territory 
which, by treaty with any Indian tribe, is not, without the consent of said 
tribe, to be included within the territorial limits or jurisdiction of any State 
or Territory; but all such territory shall be excepted out of the boundaries and 
constitute no part of the Territory of Nevada, until said tribe shall signify 
their assent to the President of the United States to be included within the 
said Territory, or to affect the authority of the Government of the United 
States to make any regulations respecting such Indians, their lands, property, 
or other rights, by treaty, law, or otherwise, which it would have been 
competent for the Government to make if this act had never passed: Provided, 
further, That nothing in this act contained shall be construed to inhibit the 
Government of the United States from dividing said Territory into two or more 
Territories, in such manner and at such times as Congress shall deem convenient 
and proper, or from attaching any portion thereof to any other Territory or 
State. 
Sec. 2. Governor: Term, powers and duties. And be it further enacted, That the 
executive power and authority in and over said Territory of Nevada shall be 
vested in a governor, who shall hold his office for four years, and until his 
successor shall be appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the 
President 
of the United States. The governor shall reside within said Territory, shall be 
commander-in-chief of the militia thereof, shall perform the duties and receive 
the emoluments of superintendent of Indian Affairs, and shall approve all laws 
passed by the legislative assembly before they shall take effect; he may grant 
pardons for offences against the laws of said Territory, and reprieves for 
offences against the laws of the United States until the decision of the 
President can be made known thereon; he shall commission all officers who shall 
be appointed to office under the laws of said Territory, and shall take care 
that the laws be faithfully executed.
NEVADA CASES.
Governor's role in enactment of laws. On petition for writ of mandamus to 
enforce distribution of taxes for common schools in Ormsby County as required by 
certain acts of territorial legislature, provision of section 4 of act 
organizing territory, which vested legislative power in governor and legislative 
assembly, limited power to approve laws as conferred on governor by section 2, 
and act signed by governor after adjournment of legislative assembly was void. 
Trustees of School Dist. No. 1 v. County Comm'rs, 1 Nev. 334 (1865)
Sec. 3. Territorial secretary: Term, powers and duties. And be it further 
enacted, That there shall be a secretary of said Territory, who shall reside 
therein, and hold his office for four years, unless sooner removed by the 
President of the United States; he shall record and preserve all the laws and 
proceedings of the legislative assembly hereinafter constituted, and all the 
acts and proceedings of the governor, in his executive department; he shall 
transmit one copy of the laws and one copy of the executive proceedings, on or 
before the first day of December in each year, to the President of the United 
States, and at the same time two copies of the laws to the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives and the President of the Senate, for the use of Congress; and 
in case of the death, removal, or resignation, or other necessary absence of the 
governor from the Territory, the secretary shall have, and he is hereby 
authorized and required, to execute and perform all the powers and duties of the 
governor during such vacancy or necessary absence, or until another governor 
shall be duly appointed to fill such vacancy.
Sec. 4. Legislative assembly: Council and house of representatives. And be it 
further enacted, That the legislative power and authority of said Territory 
shall be vested in the governor and a legislative assembly. The legislative 
assembly shall consist of a Council and House of Representatives. The Council 
shall consist of nine members, which may be increased to thirteen, having the 
qualifications of voters as hereinafter prescribed, whose term of service shall 
continue two years. The House of Representatives shall consist of thirteen 
members, which may be increased to twenty-six, possessing the same 
qualifications as prescribed for members of the Council, and whose term of 
service shall continue one year. An apportionment shall be made, as nearly equal 
as practicable, among the several counties or districts for the election of the 
Council and House of Representatives, giving to each section of the Territory 
representation in the ratio of its population (Indians excepted), as nearly as 
may be; and the members of the Council and of the House of Representatives shall 
reside in, and be inhabitants of, the district for which they may be elected, 
respectively. Previous to the first election, the Governor shall cause a census 
or enumeration of the inhabitants of the several counties and districts of the 
Territory to be taken; and the first election shall be held at such time and 
places, and be conducted in such manner, as the Governor shall appoint and 
direct; and he shall, at the same time, declare the number of the members of the 
Council and House of Representatives to which each of the counties or districts 
shall be entitled under this act. The number of persons authorized to be elected 
having the highest number of votes in each of said council districts for members 
of the Council shall be declared by the Governor to be duly elected to the 
Council; and the person or persons authorized to be elected having the greatest 
number of votes for the House of Representatives, equal to the number to which 
each county or district shall be entitled, shall be declared by the Governor to 
be elected members of the House of Representatives: Provided, That in case of a 
tie between two or more persons voted for, the Governor shall order a new 
election to supply the vacancy made by such tie. And the persons thus elected to 
the legislative assembly shall meet at such place and on such day as the 
Governor shall appoint; but thereafter, the time, place, and manner of holding 
and conducting all elections by the people, and the apportioning the 
representations, in the several counties or districts to the Council and House 
of Representatives, according to the population, shall be prescribed by law, as 
well as the day of the commencement of the regular sessions of the legislative 
assembly: Provided, That no one session shall exceed the term of forty days, 
except the first, which may be extended to sixty days, but no longer.
NEVADA CASES.
Governor's role in enactment of laws. On petition for writ of mandamus to 
enforce distribution of taxes for common schools in Ormsby County as required by 
certain acts of territorial legislature, provision of section 4 of act 
organizing territory, which vested legislative power in governor and legislative 
assembly, limited power to approve laws as conferred on governor by section 2, 
and act signed by governor after adjournment of legislative assembly was void. 
Trustees of School Dist. No. 1 v. County Comm'rs, 1 Nev. 334 (1865)
Sec. 5. Qualifications of voters and officers. And be it further enacted, That 
every free white male inhabitant of the United States above the age of 
twenty-one years, who shall have been a resident of said Territory at the time 
of the passage of this act, shall be entitled to vote at the first election, and 
shall be eligible to any office within the said Territory; but the 
qualifications of voters and of holding office at all subsequent elections shall 
be such as shall be prescribed by the Legislative Assembly: Provided, That the 
right of suffrage and of holding office shall be exercised only by citizens of 
the United States and those who shall have declared on oath their intention to 
become such, and shall have taken an oath to support the Constitution of the 
United States.
Sec. 6. Legislative power. And be it further enacted, That the legislative power 
of the Territory shall extend to all rightful subjects of legislation consistent 
with the Constitution of the United States and the provisions of this act; but 
no law shall be passed interfering with the primary disposal of the soil; no tax 
shall be imposed upon the property of the United States; nor shall the lands or 
other property of non-residents be taxed higher than the lands or other property 
of residents; nor shall any law be passed impairing the rights of private 
property; nor shall any discrimination be made in taxing different kinds of 
property; but all property subject to taxation shall be in proportion to the 
value of the property taxed.
 
NEVADA CASES.
Taxation of property. Territorial legislature may tax any species of property, 
whether real, personal or mixed, corporeal or incorporeal, so far as they are 
not restrained by the organic act. Hale & Norcross Gold & Silver Mining Co. v. 
Storey County, 1 Nev. 104 (1865)
Taxation of possessory interest in mining claim. Taxation of possessory interest 
in mining claim was not in violation of section 6 of Act Organizing the 
Territory of Nevada, which prohibited territorial legislature from taxing 
property of United States. Hale & Norcross Gold & Silver Mining Co. v. Storey 
County, 1 Nev. 104 (1865)
Sec. 7. Township, district and county officers: Appointment; election. And be it 
further enacted, That all township, district, and county officers, not herein 
otherwise provided for, shall be appointed or elected, as the case may be, in 
such manner as shall be provided by the governor and legislative assembly of the 
Territory. The governor shall nominate and, by and with the advice and consent 
of the legislative council, appoint all officers not herein otherwise provided 
for; and, in the first instance, the governor alone may appoint all said 
officers, who shall hold their offices until the end of the first session of the 
legislative assembly, and shall lay off the necessary districts for members of 
the council and house of representatives, and all other officers.
Sec. 8. Members of legislative assembly ineligible to certain offices. And be it 
further enacted, That no member of the legislative assembly shall hold or be 
appointed to any office which shall have been created, or the salary or 
emoluments of which shall have been increased while he was a member, during the 
term for which he was elected, and for one year after the expiration of such 
term; and no person holding a commission or appointment under the United States, 
except postmasters, shall be a member of the legislative assembly, or shall hold 
any office under the government of said Territory.
Sec. 9. Courts; judicial districts; jurisdiction of courts. And be it further 
enacted, That the judicial power of said Territory shall be vested in a supreme 
court, district courts, probate courts, and in justices of the peace. The 
supreme court shall consist of a chief justice and two associate justices, any 
two of whom shall constitute a quorum, and who shall hold a term at the seat of 
government of said Territory annually, and they shall hold their offices during 
the period of four years. The said Territory shall be divided into three 
judicial districts, and a district court shall be held in each of said districts 
by one of the justices of the supreme court, at such time and place as may be 
prescribed by law; and the said judges shall, after their appointments, 
respectively, reside in the districts which shall be assigned them. The 
jurisdiction of the several courts herein provided for, both appellate and 
original, and that of the probate courts and of the justices of the peace, shall 
be as limited by law: Provided, That justices of the peace shall not have 
jurisdiction of any matter in controversy when the title of boundaries of land 
may be in dispute, or where the debt or sum claimed shall exceed one hundred 
dollars; and the said supreme and district courts, respectively, shall possess 
chancery as well as common-law jurisdiction; and authority for redress of all 
wrongs committed against the Constitution or laws of the United States, or of 
the Territory, affecting persons or property. Each district court, or the judge 
thereof, shall appoint its clerk, who shall also be the register in chancery, 
and shall keep his office at the place where the court may be held. Writs of 
error, bills of exception, and appeals, shall be allowed in all cases from the 
final decisions of said district courts to the supreme court, under such 
regulations as may be prescribed by law; but in no case removed to the supreme 
court shall trial by jury be allowed in said court. The supreme court, or the 
justices thereof, shall appoint its own clerk, and every clerk shall hold his 
office at the pleasure of the court for which he shall have been appointed. 
Writs of error and appeals from the final decisions of said supreme court, shall 
be allowed, and may be taken to the Supreme Court of the United States, in the 
same manner and under the same regulations as from the circuit courts of the 
United States, where the value of the property, or the amount in controversy, to 
be ascertained by the oath or affirmation of either party, or other competent 
witness, shall exceed one thousand dollars; and each of the said district courts 
shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction in all cases arising under the 
Constitution and laws of the United States as is vested in the circuit and 
district courts of the United States; and the said supreme and district courts 
of the said Territory, and the respective judges thereof, shall and may grant 
writs of habeas corpus in all cases in which the same are grantable by the 
judges of the United States in the District of Columbia; and the first six days 
of every term of said courts, or so much thereof as shall be necessary, shall be 
appropriated to the trial of causes arising under the said Constitution and 
laws; and writs of error and appeals in all such cases shall be made to the 
supreme court of said Territory the same as in other cases. The said clerk shall 
receive, in all such cases, the same fees which the clerks of the district 
courts of Utah Territory now receive for similar services.
NEVADA CASES.
Jurisdictional limit applies to all cases, regardless of theory of recovery. 
Provision of section 9 of act organizing territory which provided that justices'
courts did not have jurisdiction where debt or sum claimed exceeded one hundred 
dollars (see NRS 4.370 and 73.010) applied to all cases cognizable in justices' 
courts, whether they arose from contract or in tort. Armstrong v. Paul, 1 Nev. 
134 (1865)
Sec. 10. Attorney and marshal for territory: Appointment; term; duties. And be 
it further enacted, That there shall be appointed an attorney for said 
Territory, who shall continue in office for four years, unless sooner removed by 
the President, and who shall receive the same fees and salary as the attorney of 
the United States for the present Territory of Utah. There shall also be a 
marshal for the Territory appointed, who shall hold his office for four years, 
unless sooner removed by the President, and who shall execute all processes 
issuing from the said courts when exercising their jurisdiction as circuit and 
district courts of the United States; he shall perform the duties, be subject to 
the same regulations and penalties, and be entitled to the same fees as the 
marshal of the district court of the United States for the present Territory of 
Utah, and shall, in addition, be paid two hundred dollars annually as a 
compensation for extra services.
Sec. 11. Presidential appointment of governor, secretary, justices, attorney and 
marshal; compensation of legislative assembly. And be it further enacted, That 
the governor, secretary, chief justice and associate justices, attorney, and 
marshal, shall be nominated and, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, appointed by the President of the United States. The governor and 
secretary to be appointed as aforesaid shall, before they act as such, 
respectively take an oath or affirmation before the district judge, or some 
justice of the peace in the limits of said Territory duly authorized to 
administer oaths and affirmations by the laws now in force therein, or before 
the Chief Justice or some associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United 
States, to support the Constitution of the United States and faithfully to 
discharge the duties of their respective offices; which said oaths, when so 
taken, shall be certified by the person by whom the same shall have been taken, 
and such certificates shall be received and recorded by the secretary among the 
executive proceedings; and the chief justice and associate justices, and all 
other civil officers in said Territory, before they act as such, shall take a 
like oath or affirmation before the said governor or secretary, or some judge or 
justice of the peace of the Territory who may be duly commissioned and 
qualified, which said oath or affirmation shall be certified and transmitted by 
the person taking the same to the secretary, to be by him recorded as aforesaid; 
and afterwards the like oath or affirmation shall be taken, certified, and 
recorded in such manner and form as may be prescribed by law. The governor shall 
receive an annual salary of fifteen hundred dollars as governor, and one 
thousand dollars as superintendent of Indian Affairs; the chief justice and 
associate justices shall each receive an annual salary of eighteen hundred 
dollars; the secretary shall receive an annual salary of eighteen hundred 
dollars. The said salaries shall be paid quarter-yearly at the Treasury of the 
United States. The members of the legislative assembly shall be entitled to 
receive three dollars each per day during their attendance at the session 
thereof, and three dollars for every twenty miles travel in going to and 
returning from the said sessions, estimated according to the nearest usually 
travelled route. There shall be appropriated annually the sum of one thousand 
dollars, to be expended by the governor to defray the contingent expenses of the 
Territory. There shall also be appropriated annually a sufficient sum, to be 
expended by the secretary of the Territory, and upon an estimate to be made by 
the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, to defray the expenses of 
the legislative assembly, the printing of the laws, and other incidental 
expenses; and the secretary of the Territory shall annually account to the 
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for the manner in which the 
aforesaid sum shall have been expended.
Sec. 12. First meeting of legislative assembly; seat of government. And be it 
further enacted, That the legislative assembly of the Territory of Nevada shall 
hold its first session at such time and place in said Territory as the governor 
thereof shall appoint and direct; and at said first session, or as soon 
thereafter as they shall deem expedient, the governor and legislative assembly 
shall proceed to locate and establish the seat of government for said Territory 
at such place as they may deem eligible; which place, however, shall thereafter 
be subject to be changed by the said governor and legislative assembly.
Sec. 13. Delegate to House of Representatives of United States: Election, rights 
and privileges. And be it further enacted, That a delegate to the House of 
Representatives of the United States, to serve during each Congress of the 
United States, may be elected by the voters qualified to elect members of the 
legislative assembly, who shall be entitled to the same rights and privileges as 
are exercised and enjoyed by the delegates from the several other Territories of 
the United States to the said House of Representatives. The first election shall 
be held at such time and places, and be conducted in such manner, as the 
governor shall appoint and direct; and at all subsequent elections, the times, 
places, and manner of holding elections shall be prescribed by law. The person 
having the greatest number of votes shall be declared by the governor to be duly 
elected, and a certificate thereof shall be given accordingly.
Sec. 14. Sixteenth and thirty-sixth sections in each township reserved for 
schools. And be it further enacted, That when the land in said Territory shall 
be surveyed, under the direction of the Government of the United States, 
preparatory to bringing the same into market, sections numbered sixteen and 
thirty-six in each township in said Territory shall be, and the same is hereby 
reserved for the purpose of being applied to schools in the States hereafter to 
be erected out of the same.
Sec. 15. Judicial districts: Organization; assignment of judges. And be it 
further enacted, That temporarily, and until otherwise provided by law, the 
governor of said Territory may define the judicial districts of said Territory 
and assign the judges who may be appointed for said Territory to the several 
districts, and also appoint the times and places for holding courts in the 
several counties or subdivisions in each of said judicial districts, by 
proclamation to be issued by him; but the legislative assembly, at their first 
or any subsequent session, may organize, alter, or modify such judicial 
districts, and assign the judges, and alter the times and places of holding the 
courts, as to them shall seem proper and convenient.
Sec. 16. Applicability of United States Constitution. And be it further enacted, 
That the Constitution and all laws of the United States which are not locally 
inapplicable shall have the same force and effect within the said Territory of 
Nevada as elsewhere within the United States.
Sec. 17. Surveyor general: Appointment, powers and duties. And be it further 
enacted, That the President of the United States, by and with the advice and 
consent of the Senate, shall be, and he is hereby, authorized to appoint a 
surveyor general for Nevada, who shall locate his office at such place as the 
Secretary of the Interior shall from time to time direct, and whose duties, 
powers, obligations, responsibilities, compensation, and allowances for clerk 
hire, office rent, fuel, and incidental expenses, shall be the same as those of 
the surveyor general of New Mexico, under the direction of the Secretary of the 
Interior, and such instructions as he may from time to time deem it advisable to 
give him.
Approved, March 2, 1861.



ACT OF CONGRESS (1864) ENABLING THE PEOPLE
OF NEVADA TO FORM A CONSTITUTION
AND STATE GOVERNMENT

[See 13 United States Statutes at Large (1864), pp. 30-32. Section leadlines 
have been supplied by the Legislative Counsel of the State of 
Nevada.]

Chap. XXXVI. An Act to enable the People of Nevada to form a Constitution and 
State Government, and for the Admission of such State into the Union on an equal 
Footing with the original States.
Section 1. Authorization for formation of state. Be it enacted by the Senate and 
House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, 
That the inhabitants of that portion of the territory of Nevada included in the 
boundaries hereinafter designated be, and they are hereby, authorized to form 
for themselves, out of said territory, a state government, with the name 
aforesaid, which said state, when formed, shall be admitted into the Union upon 
an equal footing with the original states, in all respects whatsoever.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 1, 33.
Sec. 2. Boundaries of state. And be it further enacted, That the said state of 
Nevada shall consist of all the territory included within the following 
boundaries, to wit: Commencing at a point formed by the intersection of the 
thirty-eighth degree of longitude west from Washington with the thirty-seventh 
degree of north latitude; thence due west along said thirty-seventh degree of 
north latitude to the eastern boundary line of the state of California; thence 
in a northwesterly direction along the said eastern boundary line of the state 
of California to the forty-third degree of longitude west from Washington; 
thence north along said forty-third degree of west longitude and said eastern 
boundary line of the state of California to the forty-second degree of north 
latitude; thence due east along the said forty-second degree of north latitude 
to a point formed by its intersection with the aforesaid thirty-eighth degree of 
longitude west from Washington; thence due south down said thirty-eighth degree 
of west longitude to the place of beginning.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 33, 525.
Sec. 3. Constitutional convention: Qualified electors. And be it further 
enacted, That all persons qualified by law to vote for representatives to the 
general assembly of said territory, at the date of the passage of this act shall 
be qualified to be elected, and they are authorized to vote for and choose 
representatives to form a convention, under such rules and regulations as the 
governor of said territory may prescribe; and also to vote upon the acceptance 
or rejection of such constitution as may be formed by said convention, under 
such rules and regulations as the said convention may prescribe; and if any of 
said citizens are enlisted in the army of the United States, and are still 
within said territory, they shall be permitted to vote at their place of 
rendezvous; and [if] any are absent from said territory, by reason of their 
enlistment in the army of the United States, they shall be permitted to vote at 
their place of service, under the rules and regulations in each case to be 
prescribed as aforesaid; and the aforesaid representatives to form the aforesaid 
convention shall be apportioned among the several counties in said territory in 
proportion to the population as near as may be; and said apportionment shall be 
made for said territory by the governor, United States district-attorney, and 
chief justice thereof, or any two of them; and the governor of said territory 
shall, by proclamation on or before the first Monday of May next, order an 
election of the representatives as aforesaid to be held on the first Monday in 
June thereafter throughout the territory, and such election shall be conducted 
in the same manner as is prescribed by the laws of said territory regulating 
elections therein for members of the house of representatives, and the number of 
members to said convention shall be the same as now constitute both branches of 
the legislature of the aforesaid territory.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 124, 125, 131, 252, 787
Sec. 4. Authorization to form constitution and state government; limitations. 
And be it further enacted, That the members of the convention, thus elected, 
shall meet at the capital of said territory on the first Monday in July next, 
and, after organization, shall declare, on behalf of the people of said 
territory, that they adopt the constitution of the United States. Whereupon the 
said convention shall be, and it is hereby, authorized to form a constitution 
and state government for said territory: Provided, That the constitution, when 
formed, shall be republican, and not repugnant to the constitution of the United 
States, and the principles of the Declaration of Independence: And provided 
further, That said convention shall provide, by an ordinance irrevocable, 
without the consent of the United States and the people of said state:
First. That there shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude in the said 
state, otherwise than in the punishment of crimes, whereof the party shall have 
been duly convicted.
Second. That perfect toleration of religious sentiment shall be secured, and no 
inhabitant of said state shall ever be molested in person or property on account 
of his or her mode of religious worship.
Third. That the people inhabiting said territory do agree and declare that they 
forever disclaim all right and title to the unappropriated public lands lying 
within said territory, and that the same shall be and remain at the sole and 
entire disposition of the United States; and that the lands belonging to 
citizens of the United States residing without the said state shall never be 
taxed higher than the land belonging to the residents thereof; and that no taxes 
shall be imposed by said state on lands or property therein belonging to, or 
which may hereafter be purchased by, the United States.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 66.
 
Sec. 5. Constitution to be submitted to popular vote. And be it further enacted, 
That in case a constitution and state government shall be formed for the people 
of said territory of Nevada, in compliance with the provisions of this act, that 
said convention forming the same shall provide by ordinance for submitting said 
constitution to the people of said state for their ratification or rejection at 
an election to be held on the first Wednesday of September, one thousand eight 
hundred and sixty-four, at such places and under such regulations as may be 
prescribed therein, at which election the lawful voters of said new state shall 
vote directly for or against the proposed constitution, and the returns of said 
election shall be made to the acting governor of the territory, who, with the 
United States district-attorney and chief justice of said territory, or any two 
of them, shall canvass the same, and if a majority of legal votes shall be cast 
for said constitution in said proposed state, the said acting governor shall 
certify the same to the President of the United States, together with a copy of 
said constitution and ordinances; whereupon it shall be the duty of the 
President of the United States to issue his proclamation declaring the state 
admitted into the Union on an equal footing with the original states, without 
any further action whatever on the part of congress.
[Amended in 1864. See 13 United States Statutes at Large (1864), p. 85. (Chap. 
XCIV. An Act to amend an Act entitled "An Act to enable the People of Nevada to 
form a Constitution and State Government, and for the Admission of such State 
into the Union on an equal Footing with the original States.")]
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, pp. 124, 131, 133, 135.
Sec. 6. Representation in House of Representatives of the United States. And be 
it further enacted, That until the next general census shall be taken said state 
of Nevada shall be entitled to one representative in the house of 
representatives of the United States, which representative, together with the 
governor and state and other officers provided for in said constitution, may be 
elected on 
the same day a vote is taken for or against the proposed constitution and state 
government.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 34.
Sec. 7. Grant of public lands for support of common schools. And be it further 
enacted, That sections numbers sixteen and thirty-six, in every township, and 
where such sections have been sold or otherwise disposed of by any act of 
congress, other lands equivalent thereto in legal subdivisions of not less than 
one quarter-section, and as contiguous as may be, shall be, and are hereby, 
granted to said state for the support of common schools.
NEVADA CASES.
Reservation of mineral lands. In action of ejectment to recover lands claimed by 
plaintiff under patent from State of Nevada, and by defen-
dant under mining patent from Federal Govern-ment issued after state patent but 
prior to survey of land, defendant prevailed, because although lands were 
originally included in federal grant to 
state by section 7 of act enabling people to form state, grant was modified to 
reserve mineral lands to Federal Government by Act of Congress prior to 
disposition of any of lands, and modification was accepted by state by 
legislative act. Heydenfeldt v. Daney Gold & Silver Mining Co., 10 Nev. 290 
(1875), aff'd, 93 U.S. 634, 23 L. Ed. 995 (1877), distinguished, Shoemaker v. 
Hatch, 13 Nev. 261, at 267 (1878)
Date when title passed. Grant of 16th and 36th sections to state in section 7 of 
act enabling people to form state was grant in praesenti, in nature of float, 
taking effect upon specific tracts of land as soon as tracts were surveyed, but 
not before. Any such sections pre-empted prior to survey did not pass to state, 
but other equivalent lands were granted in lieu thereof. Layton v. Farrell, 11 
Nev. 451 (1876), distinguished, Shoemaker v. Hatch, 13 Nev. 261, at 267 (1878)
Sec. 8. Grant of lands to state for erecting public buildings. And be it further 
enacted, That provided the state of Nevada shall be admitted into the Union, in 
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this act, that twenty entire 
sections of the unappropriated public lands within said state, to be selected 
and located by direction of the legislature thereof, on or before the first day 
of January, anno Domini eighteen hundred and sixty-eight, shall be, and they are 
hereby, granted, in legal subdivisions of not less than one hundred and sixty 
acres, to said state, for the purpose of erecting public buildings at the 
capital of said state, for legislative and judicial purposes, in such manner as 
the legislature shall prescribe.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 34.
Sec. 9. Grant of lands to state for erecting state prison. And be it further 
enacted, That twenty other entire sections of land, as aforesaid, to be selected 
and located as aforesaid, in legal subdivisions, as aforesaid, shall be, and 
they are hereby, granted to said state for the purpose of erecting a suitable 
building for a penitentiary or state prison in the manner aforesaid.
Sec. 10. Five percent of subsequent sales of public lands by United States to be 
paid to state for public roads and irrigation. And be it further enacted, That 
five percentum of the proceeds of the sales of all public lands lying within 
said state, which shall be sold by the United States subsequent to the admission 
of said state into the Union, after deducting all the expenses incident to the 
same, shall be paid to the said state for the purpose of making and improving 
public roads, constructing ditches or canals, to effect a general system of 
irrigation of the agricultural land in the state, as the legislature shall 
direct.
Sec. 11. Applicability of laws of United States after admission; state to 
constitute one federal judicial district. And be it further enacted, That from 
and after the admission of the said state of Nevada into the Union, in pursuance 
of this act, the laws of the United States, not locally inapplicable, shall have 
the same force and effect within the said state as elsewhere within the United 
States, and said state shall constitute one judicial district, and be called the 
district of Nevada.
CONSTITUTIONAL DEBATES.
Nevada Constitutional Debates and Proceedings, p. 34.
Approved, March 21, 1864.

